{"id": "11042", "revid": "16847007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11042", "title": "Fat", "text": "In nutrition, biology, and chemistry, fat usually means any ester of fatty acids, or a mixture of such compounds, most commonly those that occur in living beings or in food.\nThe term often refers specifically to triglycerides (triple esters of glycerol), that are the main components of vegetable oils and of fatty tissue in animals; or, even more narrowly, to triglycerides that are solid or semisolid at room temperature, thus excluding oils. The term may also be used more broadly as a synonym of lipid\u2014any substance of biological relevance, composed of carbon, hydrogen, or oxygen, that is insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar solvents. In this sense, besides the triglycerides, the term would include several other types of compounds like mono- and diglycerides, phospholipids (such as lecithin), sterols (such as cholesterol), waxes (such as beeswax), and free fatty acids, which are usually present in human diet in smaller amounts.\nFats are one of the three main macronutrient groups in human diet, along with carbohydrates and proteins, and the main components of common food products like milk, butter, tallow, lard, salt pork, and cooking oils. They are a major and dense source of food energy for many animals and play important structural and metabolic functions in most living beings, including energy storage, waterproofing, and thermal insulation. The human body can produce the fat it requires from other food ingredients, except for a few essential fatty acids that must be included in the diet. Dietary fats are also the carriers of some flavor and aroma ingredients and vitamins that are not water-soluble.\nBiological importance.\nIn humans and many animals, fats serve both as energy sources and as stores for energy in excess of what the body needs immediately. Each gram of fat when burned or metabolized releases about nine food calories (37 kJ = 8.8 kcal).\nFats are also sources of essential fatty acids, an important dietary requirement. Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat-soluble, meaning they can only be digested, absorbed, and transported in conjunction with fats.\nFats play a vital role in maintaining healthy skin and hair, insulating body organs against shock, maintaining body temperature, and promoting healthy cell function. Fat also serves as a useful buffer against a host of diseases. When a particular substance, whether chemical or biotic, reaches unsafe levels in the bloodstream, the body can effectively dilute\u2014or at least maintain equilibrium of\u2014the offending substances by storing it in new fat tissue. This helps to protect vital organs, until such time as the offending substances can be metabolized or removed from the body by such means as excretion, urination, accidental or intentional bloodletting, sebum excretion, and hair growth.\nAdipose tissue.\nIn animals, adipose tissue, or fatty tissue is the body's means of storing metabolic energy over extended periods of time. Adipocytes (fat cells) store fat derived from the diet and from liver metabolism. Under energy stress these cells may degrade their stored fat to supply fatty acids and also glycerol to the circulation. These metabolic activities are regulated by several hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon and epinephrine). Adipose tissue also secretes the hormone leptin.\nProduction and processing.\nA variety of chemical and physical techniques are used for the production and processing of fats, both industrially and in cottage or home settings. They include:\nMetabolism.\nThe pancreatic lipase acts at the ester bond, hydrolyzing the bond and \"releasing\" the fatty acid. In triglyceride form, lipids cannot be absorbed by the duodenum. Fatty acids, monoglycerides (one glycerol, one fatty acid), and some diglycerides are absorbed by the duodenum, once the triglycerides have been broken down.\nIn the intestine, following the secretion of lipases and bile, triglycerides are split into monoacylglycerol and free fatty acids in a process called lipolysis. They are subsequently moved to absorptive enterocyte cells lining the intestines. The triglycerides are rebuilt in the enterocytes from their fragments and packaged together with cholesterol and proteins to form chylomicrons. These are excreted from the cells and collected by the lymph system and transported to the large vessels near the heart before being mixed into the blood. Various tissues can capture the chylomicrons, releasing the triglycerides to be used as a source of energy. Liver cells can synthesize and store triglycerides. When the body requires fatty acids as an energy source, the hormone glucagon signals the breakdown of the triglycerides by hormone-sensitive lipase to release free fatty acids. As the brain cannot utilize fatty acids as an energy source (unless converted to a ketone), the glycerol component of triglycerides can be converted into glucose, via gluconeogenesis by conversion into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and then into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, for brain fuel when it is broken down. Fat cells may also be broken down for that reason if the brain's needs ever outweigh the body's.\nTriglycerides cannot pass through cell membranes freely. Special enzymes on the walls of blood vessels called lipoprotein lipases must break down triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol. Fatty acids can then be taken up by cells via fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs).\nTriglycerides, as major components of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and chylomicrons, play an important role in metabolism as energy sources and transporters of dietary fat. They contain more than twice as much energy (approximately 9kcal/g or 38kJ/g) as carbohydrates (approximately 4kcal/g or 17kJ/g).\nNutritional and health aspects.\nThe most common type of fat, in human diet and most living beings, is a triglyceride, an ester of the triple alcohol glycerol and three fatty acids. The molecule of a triglyceride can be described as resulting from a condensation reaction (specifically, esterification) between each of glycerol's \u2013OH groups and the HO\u2013 part of the carboxyl group of each fatty acid, forming an ester bridge with elimination of a water molecule .\nOther less common types of fats include diglycerides and monoglycerides, where the esterification is limited to two or just one of glycerol's \u2013OH groups. Other alcohols, such as cetyl alcohol (predominant in spermaceti), may replace glycerol. In the phospholipids, one of the fatty acids is replaced by phosphoric acid or a monoester thereof.\nThe benefits and risks of various amounts and types of dietary fats have been the object of much study, and are still highly controversial topics.\nEssential fatty acids.\nThere are two essential fatty acids (EFAs) in human nutrition: alpha-Linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) and linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid). The adult body can synthesize other lipids that it needs from these two.\nDietary sources.\nSaturated vs. unsaturated fats.\nDifferent foods contain different amounts of fat with different proportions of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. Some animal products, like beef and dairy products made with whole or reduced fat milk like yogurt, ice cream, cheese and butter have mostly saturated fatty acids (and some have significant contents of dietary cholesterol). Other animal products, like pork, poultry, eggs, and seafood have mostly unsaturated fats. Industrialized baked goods may use fats with high unsaturated fat contents as well, especially those containing partially hydrogenated oils, and processed foods that are deep-fried in hydrogenated oil are high in saturated fat content.\nPlants and fish oil generally contain a higher proportion of unsaturated acids, although there are exceptions such as coconut oil and palm kernel oil. Foods containing unsaturated fats include avocado, nuts, olive oils, and vegetable oils such as canola.\nMany scientific studies have found that replacing saturated fats with \"cis\" unsaturated fats in the diet reduces risk of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), diabetes, or death. These studies prompted many medical organizations and public health departments, including the World Health Organization (WHO), to officially issue that advice. Some countries with such recommendations include:\nA 2004 review concluded that \"no lower safe limit of specific saturated fatty acid intakes has been identified\" and recommended that the influence of varying saturated fatty acid intakes against a background of different individual lifestyles and genetic backgrounds should be the focus in future studies.\nThis advice is often oversimplified by labeling the two kinds of fats as \"bad fats\" and \"good fats\", respectively. However, since the fats and oils in most natural and traditionally processed foods contain both unsaturated and saturated fatty acids, the complete exclusion of saturated fat is unrealistic and possibly unwise. For instance, some foods rich in saturated fat, such as coconut and palm oil, are an important source of cheap dietary calories for a large fraction of the population in developing countries.\nConcerns were also expressed at a 2010 conference of the American Dietetic Association that a blanket recommendation to avoid saturated fats could drive people to also reduce the amount of polyunsaturated fats, which may have health benefits, and/or replace fats by refined carbohydrates \u2014 which carry a high risk of obesity and heart disease.\nFor these reasons, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, for example, recommends to consume less than 10% (7% for high-risk groups) of calories from saturated fat, with 15-30% of total calories from all fat. A general 7% limit was recommended also by the American Heart Association (AHA) in 2006.\nThe WHO/FAO report also recommended replacing fats so as to reduce the content of myristic and palmitic acids, specifically.\nThe so-called Mediterranean diet, prevalent in many countries in the Mediterranean Sea area, includes more total fat than the diet of Northern European countries, but most of it is in the form of unsaturated fatty acids (specifically, monounsaturated and omega-3) from olive oil and fish, vegetables, and certain meats like lamb, while consumption of saturated fat is minimal in comparison.\nA 2017 review found evidence that a Mediterranean-style diet could reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, overall cancer incidence, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and mortality rate. A 2018 review showed that a Mediterranean-like diet may improve overall health status, such as reduced risk of non-communicable diseases. It also may reduce the social and economic costs of diet-related illnesses.\nA small number of contemporary reviews have challenged this negative view of saturated fats. For example, an evaluation of evidence from 1966 to 1973 of the observed health impact of replacing dietary saturated fat with linoleic acid found that it \"increased\" rates of death from all causes, coronary heart disease, and cardiovascular disease. These studies have been disputed by many scientists, and the consensus in the medical community is that saturated fat and cardiovascular disease are closely related. Still, these discordant studies fueled debate over the merits of substituting polyunsaturated fats for saturated fats.\nCardiovascular disease.\nThe effect of saturated fat on cardiovascular disease has been extensively studied. The general consensus is that there is evidence of moderate-quality of a strong, consistent, and graded relationship between saturated fat intake, blood cholesterol levels, and the incidence of cardiovascular disease. The relationships are accepted as causal, including by many government and medical organizations.\nA 2017 review by the AHA estimated that replacement of saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat in the American diet could reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases by 30%.\nThe consumption of saturated fat is generally considered a risk factor for dyslipidemia\u2014abnormal blood lipid levels, including high total cholesterol, high levels of triglycerides, high levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL, \"bad\" cholesterol) or low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL, \"good\" cholesterol). These parameters in turn are believed to be risk indicators for some types of cardiovascular disease. These effects were observed in children too.\nSeveral meta-analyses (reviews and consolidations of multiple previously published experimental studies) have confirmed a significant relationship between saturated fat and high serum cholesterol levels, which in turn have been claimed to have a causal relation with increased risk of cardiovascular disease (the so-called lipid hypothesis). However, high cholesterol may be caused by many factors. Other indicators, such as high LDL/HDL ratio, have proved to be more predictive. In a study of myocardial infarction in 52 countries, the ApoB/ApoA1 (related to LDL and HDL, respectively) ratio was the strongest predictor of CVD among all risk factors. There are other pathways involving obesity, triglyceride levels, insulin sensitivity, endothelial function, and thrombogenicity, among others, that play a role in CVD, although it seems, in the absence of an adverse blood lipid profile, the other known risk factors have only a weak atherogenic effect. Different saturated fatty acids have differing effects on various lipid levels.\nCancer.\nThe evidence for a relation between saturated fat intake and cancer is significantly weaker, and there does not seem to be a clear medical consensus about it.\nBones.\nVarious animal studies have indicated that the intake of saturated fat has a negative effect on the mineral density of bones. One study suggested that men may be particularly vulnerable.\nDisposition and overall health.\nStudies have shown that substituting monounsaturated fatty acids for saturated ones is associated with increased daily physical activity and resting energy expenditure. More physical activity, less anger, and less irritability were associated with a higher-oleic acid diet than one of a palmitic acid diet.\nMonounsaturated vs. polyunsaturated fat.\nThe most common fatty acids in human diet are unsaturated or mono-unsaturated. Monounsaturated fats are found in animal flesh such as red meat, whole milk products, nuts, and high fat fruits such as olives and avocados. Olive oil is about 75% monounsaturated fat. The high oleic variety sunflower oil contains at least 70% monounsaturated fat. Canola oil and cashews are both about 58% monounsaturated fat. Tallow (beef fat) is about 50% monounsaturated fat, and lard is about 40% monounsaturated fat. Other sources include hazelnut, avocado oil, macadamia nut oil, grapeseed oil, groundnut oil (peanut oil), sesame oil, corn oil, popcorn, whole grain wheat, cereal, oatmeal, almond oil, hemp oil, and tea-oil camellia.\nPolyunsaturated fatty acids can be found mostly in nuts, seeds, fish, seed oils, and oysters.\nFood sources of polyunsaturated fats include:\nInsulin resistance and sensitivity.\nMUFAs (especially oleic acid) have been found to lower the incidence of insulin resistance; PUFAs (especially large amounts of arachidonic acid) and SFAs (such as arachidic acid) increased it. These ratios can be indexed in the phospholipids of human skeletal muscle and in other tissues as well. This relationship between dietary fats and insulin resistance is presumed secondary to the relationship between insulin resistance and inflammation, which is partially modulated by dietary fat ratios (omega\u22123/6/9) with both omega\u22123 and \u22129 thought to be anti-inflammatory, and omega\u22126 pro-inflammatory (as well as by numerous other dietary components, particularly polyphenols and exercise, with both of these anti-inflammatory). Although both pro- and anti-inflammatory types of fat are biologically necessary, fat dietary ratios in most US diets are skewed towards omega\u22126, with subsequent disinhibition of inflammation and potentiation of insulin resistance. This is contrary to the suggestion that polyunsaturated fats are shown to be protective against insulin resistance.\nThe large scale KANWU study found that increasing MUFA and decreasing SFA intake could improve insulin sensitivity, but only when the overall fat intake of the diet was low. However, some MUFAs may promote insulin resistance (like the SFAs), whereas PUFAs may protect against it.\nCancer.\nLevels of oleic acid along with other MUFAs in red blood cell membranes were positively associated with breast cancer risk. The saturation index (SI) of the same membranes was inversely associated with breast cancer risk. MUFAs and low SI in erythrocyte membranes are predictors of postmenopausal breast cancer. Both of these variables depend on the activity of the enzyme delta-9 desaturase (\u03949-d).\nResults from observational clinical trials on PUFA intake and cancer have been inconsistent and vary by numerous factors of cancer incidence, including gender and genetic risk. Some studies have shown associations between higher intakes and/or blood levels of omega-3 PUFAs and a decreased risk of certain cancers, including breast and colorectal cancer, while other studies found no associations with cancer risk.\nPregnancy disorders.\nPolyunsaturated fat supplementation was found to have no effect on the incidence of pregnancy-related disorders, such as hypertension or preeclampsia, but may increase the length of gestation slightly and decreased the incidence of early premature births.\nExpert panels in the United States and Europe recommend that pregnant and lactating women consume higher amounts of polyunsaturated fats than the general population to enhance the DHA status of the fetus and newborn.\n\"Cis fat\" vs. \"trans fat\".\nIn nature, unsaturated fatty acids generally have double bonds in \"cis\" configuration (with the adjacent C\u2013C bonds on the same side) as opposed to \"trans\". Nevertheless, \"trans\" fatty acids (TFAs) occur in small amounts in meat and milk of ruminants (such as cattle and sheep), typically 2\u20135% of total fat. Natural TFAs, which include conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) and vaccenic acid, originate in the rumen of these animals. CLA has two double bonds, one in the \"cis\" configuration and one in \"trans\", which makes it simultaneously a \"cis\"- and a \"trans\"-fatty acid.\nThe processing of fats by hydrogenation can convert some unsaturated fats into trans fat]]s. The presence of trans fats in various processed foods has received much attention. \nOmega-three and omega-six fatty acids.\nThe \u03c9\u22123 fatty acids have received substantial attention. Among omega-3 fatty acids, neither long-chain nor short-chain forms were consistently associated with breast cancer risk. High levels of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), however, the most abundant omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid in erythrocyte (red blood cell) membranes, were associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer. The DHA obtained through the consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids is positively associated with cognitive and behavioral performance. In addition, DHA is vital for the grey matter structure of the human brain, as well as retinal stimulation and neurotransmission.\nInteresterification.\nSome studies have investigated the health effects of interesterified (IE) fats, by comparing diets with IE and non-IE fats with the same overall fatty acid composition.\nSeveral experimental studies in humans found no statistical difference on fasting blood lipids between a diet with large amounts of IE fat, having 25-40% C16:0 or C18:0 on the 2-position, and a similar diet with non-IE fat, having only 3-9% C16:0 or C18:0 on the 2-position. A negative result was obtained also in a study that compared the effects on blood cholesterol levels of an IE fat product mimicking cocoa butter and the real non-IE product.\nA 2007 study funded by the Malaysian Palm Oil Board claimed that replacing natural palm oil by other interesterified or partially hydrogenated fats caused adverse health effects, such as higher LDL/HDL ratio and plasma glucose levels. However, these effects could be attributed to the higher percentage of saturated acids in the IE and partially hydrogenated fats, rather than to the IE process itself.\nRancification.\nUnsaturated fats undergo auto-oxidation, which involves replacement of a C-H bond with C-OH unit. The process requires oxygen (air) and is accelerated by the presence of traces of metals, which serve as catalysts. Doubly unsaturated fatty acids are particularly prone to this reaction. Vegetable oils resist this process to a small degree because they contain antioxidants, such as tocopherol. Fats and oils often are treated with chelating agents such as citric acid to remove the metal catalysts.\nRole in disease.\nIn the human body, high levels of triglycerides in the bloodstream have been linked to atherosclerosis, heart disease\nand stroke. However, the relative negative impact of raised levels of triglycerides compared to that of LDL:HDL ratios is as yet unknown. The risk can be partly accounted for by a strong inverse relationship between triglyceride level and HDL-cholesterol level. But the risk is also due to high triglyceride levels increasing the quantity of small, dense LDL particles.\nGuidelines.\nThe National Cholesterol Education Program has set guidelines for triglyceride levels:\nThese levels are tested after fasting 8 to 12 hours. Triglyceride levels remain temporarily higher for a period after eating.\nThe AHA recommends an optimal triglyceride level of 100mg/dL (1.1mmol/L) or lower to improve heart health."}
{"id": "11043", "revid": "1217652806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11043", "title": "Front line", "text": "A front line (alternatively front-line or frontline) in military terminology is the position(s) closest to the area of conflict of an armed force's personnel and equipment, usually referring to land forces. When a front (an intentional or unintentional boundary) between opposing sides forms, the front line is the area where each side's forces are engaged in conflict. Leaders have often fought at the front lines either purposefully or due to a collapse in battle formation. While a calculated risk, fighting on the front has in instances reduced communication and heightened morale. The front is in direct contrast to the rear, which is the position farthest from conflict.\nAll branches of the United States Armed Forces use the related technical terms, Forward Line of Own Troops (FLOT) and Forward Edge of Battle Area (FEBA). These terms are used as battlespace control measures that designate the forward-most friendly maritime or land forces on the battlefield at a given point in time during an armed conflict. FLOT/FEBA may include covering and screening forces. The Forward Line of Enemy Troops (FLET) is the FEBA from the enemy's perspective.\nEtymology.\nAlthough the term \"front line\" first appeared in the 1520s, it was only in 1842 that it was recorded used in the military sense. Its first use as an adjective was from 1915.\nThe word \"front\" gained the military sense of \"foremost part of an army\" in the mid-14th century, which, in turn, led the word to take on the meaning \"field of operations in contact with the enemy\" in the 1660s. That sense led to the phrase home front, which first appeared in 1919. In a non-combat situation or when a combat situation is not assumed, front can mean the direction in which the command is faced.\nThe attributive adjective version of the term front line (as in \"our front-line personnel\") describes materiel or personnel intended for or actively in forward use: at sea, on land or in the air: \"at\" the front line.\nEvolution of the concept.\nIn the land campaigns of World War I, FEBAs, FLOTs and FLETs could often be identified by eye. For example, in France and Belgium they were defined by opposing defensive trench systems.\nTypical modern conflicts are vastly different, characterised by \"war amongst the people\", the concept of a \"Three Block War\", and the presence of an asymmetric threat from irregular or terrorist combatants. In those cases, the concepts of front line, FEBA, FLOT and FLET may be of little relevance. The term \"front line\" has come to refer more to any place where bullets and bombs are flying or are likely to fly."}
{"id": "11049", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11049", "title": "FIFA", "text": "The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (), more commonly known by its acronym FIFA ( ), is the international self-regulatory governing body of association football, beach soccer, and futsal. It was founded on 21 May 1904 to oversee international competition among the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain (represented by Real Madrid CF), Sweden, and Switzerland. Headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, its membership now comprises 211 national associations. These national associations must also be members of one of the six regional confederations: CAF (Africa), AFC (Asia), UEFA (Europe), CONCACAF (North &amp; Central America and the Caribbean), OFC (Oceania), and CONMEBOL (South America).\nFIFA outlines several objectives in its organizational statutes, including growing football internationally, ensuring it is accessible to everyone, and advocating for integrity and fair play. It is responsible for organizing and promoting football's major international tournaments, notably the World Cup which began in 1930, and the Women's World Cup which commenced in 1991. Although FIFA does not solely set the laws of the game, that being the responsibility of the International Football Association Board of which FIFA is a member, it applies and enforces the rules across all FIFA competitions. All FIFA tournaments generate revenue from sponsorships; in 2022, FIFA had revenues of over US$5.8 billion, ending the 2019\u20132022 cycle with a net positive of $1.2 billion, and cash reserves of over $3.9 billion.\nReports by investigative journalists have linked FIFA leadership with corruption, bribery, and vote-rigging related to the election of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the organization's decision to award the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, respectively. These allegations led to the indictments of nine high-ranking FIFA officials and five corporate executives by the US Department of Justice on charges including racketeering, wire fraud, and money laundering. On 27 May 2015, several of these officials were arrested by Swiss authorities, who launched a simultaneous but separate criminal investigation into how the organization awarded the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Those among these officials who were also indicted in the US are expected to be extradited to face charges there as well.\nMany officials were suspended by FIFA's ethics committee including Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini. In early 2017, reports became public about FIFA president Gianni Infantino attempting to prevent the re-elections of both chairmen of the ethics committee, Cornel Borb\u00e9ly and Hans-Joachim Eckert, during the FIFA congress in May 2017. On 9 May 2017, following Infantino's proposal, The FIFA Council decided not to renew the mandates of Borb\u00e9ly and Eckert. Together with the chairmen, 11 of 13 committee members were removed. FIFA has been suspected of corruption regarding the Qatar 2022 FIFA World Cup bid.\nHistory.\nThe need for a single body to oversee association football became increasingly apparent at the beginning of the 20th century with the increasing popularity of international fixtures. The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) was founded in the rear of the headquarters of the Union des Soci\u00e9t\u00e9s Fran\u00e7aises de Sports Athl\u00e9tiques (USFSA) at the Rue Saint Honor\u00e9 229 in Paris on 21 May 1904. The French name and acronym are universally adopted outside French-speaking countries. The founding members were the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Spain (represented by then-Real Madrid CF; the Royal Spanish Football Federation was not created until 1913), Sweden and Switzerland.\nOn the same day, the German Football Association (DFB) declared its intention to affiliate through a telegram.\nThe first president of FIFA was Robert Gu\u00e9rin. Gu\u00e9rin was replaced in 1906 by Daniel Burley Woolfall from England, by then a member of the association. The first tournament FIFA staged, the association football competition for the 1908 Olympics in London was more successful than its Olympic predecessors, despite the presence of professional footballers, contrary to the founding principles of FIFA.\nMembership of FIFA expanded beyond Europe with the application of South Africa in 1909, Argentina in 1912, Canada and Chile in 1913, and the United States in 1914.\nThe 1912 Spalding Athletic Library \"Official Guide\" includes information on the 1912 Olympics (scores and stories), AAFA, and FIFA. The 1912 FIFA president was Dan B Woolfall. Daniel Burley Woolfall was president from 1906 to 1918.\nDuring World War I, with many players sent off to war and the possibility of travel for international fixtures severely limited, the organization's survival was in doubt. Post-war, following the death of Woolfall, the organization was run by Dutchman Carl Hirschmann. It was saved from extinction but at the cost of the withdrawal of the Home Nations (of the United Kingdom), who cited an unwillingness to participate in international competitions with their World War enemies. The Home Nations later resumed their membership. The FIFA collection is held by the National Football Museum at Urbis in Manchester, England. The first World Cup was held in 1930 in Montevideo, Uruguay.\nIdentity.\nFlag.\nThe FIFA flag is blue, with the organization's wordmark logo in the middle. The current FIFA flag was first flown during the 2018 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony in Moscow, Russia.\nAnthem.\nAkin to the UEFA Champions League, FIFA has adopted an anthem composed by the German composer Franz Lambert since the 1994 FIFA World Cup. It has been re-arranged and produced by Rob May and Simon Hill. The FIFA Anthem is played at the beginning of official FIFA sanctioned matches and tournaments such as international friendlies, the FIFA World Cup, FIFA Women's World Cup, FIFA U-20 World Cup, FIFA U-17 World Cup, Football at the Summer Olympics, FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup, FIFA Women's U-17 World Cup, FIFA Futsal World Cup, FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup and FIFA Club World Cup.\nSince 2007, FIFA has also required most of its broadcast partners to use short sequences including the anthem at the beginning and end of FIFA event coverage and for break bumpers to help promote FIFA's sponsors. This emulates practices long used by international football events, such as the UEFA Champions League. Exceptions may be made for specific circumstances; for example, an original piece of African music was used for bumpers during the 2010 FIFA World Cup.\nStructure.\nSix confederations and 211 national associations.\nBesides its worldwide institutions, there are six confederations recognized by FIFA which oversee the game in the different continents and regions of the world. National associations, and not the continental confederations, are members of FIFA. The continental confederations are provided for in FIFA's statutes, and membership of a union is a prerequisite to FIFA membership.\nIn total, FIFA recognizes 211 national associations and their associated men's national teams as well as 129 women's national teams; see the list of national football teams and their respective country codes. The number of FIFA member associations is higher than the number of UN member states as FIFA has admitted associations from 23 non-sovereign entities as members in their own right, such as the four Home Nations within the United Kingdom and the two special administrative regions of China: Hong Kong and Macau.\nOn 28 February 2022, FIFA suspended Russia from all competitions due to controversy surrounding Russia's invasion of Ukraine.\nFIFA can suspend countries due to numerous multifaceted issues. Common reasons include governance interference, corruption, and financial irregularities. Doping or the misappropriation of drugs is also a consideration for expulsion.\nThe FIFA Men's World Rankings are updated monthly and rank each team based on their performance in international competitions, qualifiers, and friendly matches. There is also a world ranking for women's football, amended on a quarterly schedule.\nLaws and governance.\nFIFA's headquarters is in Z\u00fcrich, and it is an association established under the law of Switzerland.\nFIFA's supreme body is the FIFA Congress, an assembly of representatives from each affiliated member association. Each national football association has one vote, regardless of size or footballing strength. The Congress assembles in ordinary sessions once every year, and extraordinary sessions have been held once a year since 1998. Congress makes decisions relating to FIFA's governing statutes and their method of implementation and application. Only Congress can pass changes to FIFA's statutes. The congress approves the annual report and decides on the acceptance of new national associations, and holds elections. Congress elects the President of FIFA, its general secretary, and the other members of the FIFA Council in the year following the FIFA World Cup.\nFIFA Council \u2013 formerly called the FIFA Executive Committee and chaired by the president \u2013 is the organization's main decision-making body in the intervals of Congress. The council comprises 37 people: the president; 8 vice-presidents; and 28 members from the confederations, with at least one of them being a woman. The executive committee is the body that decides which country will host the World Cup.\nThe president and the general secretary are the main office holders of FIFA and are in charge of its daily administration, carried in by the general secretariat, with its staff of approximately 280 members. Gianni Infantino is the current president, elected on 26 February 2016 at an extraordinary FIFA Congress session after former president Sepp Blatter was suspended pending a corruption investigation.\nFIFA's worldwide organizational structure also consists of several other bodies under the authority of the FIFA Council or created by Congress as standing committees. Among those bodies are the FIFA Emergency Committee, the FIFA Ethics Committee, the Finance Committee, the Disciplinary Committee, and the Referees Committee.\nThe FIFA Emergency Committee deals with all matters requiring immediate settlement in the time frame between the regular meetings of the FIFA Council. The Emergency Committee consists of the FIFA president as well as one member from each confederation. Emergency Committee decisions made are immediately put into legal effect, although they need to be ratified at the next Executive Committee meeting.\nAdministrative cost.\nFIFA publishes its results according to International Financial Reporting Standards. The total compensation for the management committee in 2011 was 30 million for 35 people. Blatter, the only full-time person on the committee, earned approximately two million Swiss francs, 1.2 million in salary, and the rest in bonuses. A report in London's \"The Sunday Times\" in June 2014 said the members of the committee had their salaries doubled from $100,000 to $200,000 during the year. The report also said leaked documents had indicated $4.4 million in secret bonuses had been paid to the committee members following the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.\nGovernance.\nThe laws that govern football known officially as the Laws of the Game, are not solely the responsibility of FIFA; they are maintained by a body called the International Football Association Board (IFAB). FIFA has members on its board (four representatives); the other four are provided by the football associations of the United Kingdom: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, who jointly established IFAB in 1882 and are recognized for the creation and history of the game. Changes to the Laws of the Game must be agreed upon by at least six delegates.\nThe FIFA Statutes form the overarching document guiding FIFA's governing system. The governing system is divided into separate bodies with the appropriate powers to create a system of checks and balances. It consists of four general bodies: the Congress, the executive committee, the general Secretariat, and standing and ad hoc committees.\nDiscipline of national associations.\nFIFA frequently takes active roles in the running of the sport and developing the game around the world. One of its sanctions is to suspend teams and associated members from international competition when a government interferes in the running of FIFA's associate member organizations or if the associate is not functioning correctly.\nA 2007 FIFA ruling that a player can be registered with a maximum of three clubs and appear in official matches for a maximum of two in a year measured from 1 July to 30 June has led to controversy, especially in those countries whose seasons cross that date barrier, as in the case of two former Ireland internationals. As a direct result of this controversy, FIFA modified this ruling the following year to accommodate transfers between leagues with out-of-phase seasons.\nVideo replay and goal-line technology.\nFIFA now permits the use of video evidence during matches, as well as for subsequent sanctions. However, for most of FIFA's history it stood opposed to its use. The 1970 meeting of the International Football Association Board \"agreed to request the television authorities to refrain from any slow-motion play-back which reflected, or might reflect, adversely on any decision of the referee\". As recently as 2008 FIFA president Sepp Blatter said: \"Let it be as it is and let's leave [football] with errors. The television companies will have the right to say [the referee] was right or wrong, but still, the referee makes the decision \u2013 a man, not a machine.\" This stance was finally overturned on 3 March 2018, when the IFAB wrote video assistant referees (also known as VARs) into the Laws of the Game permanently. Their use remains optional for competitions.\nIn early July 2012 FIFA sanctioned the use of goal-line technology, subject to rules specified by the International Football Association Board (IFAB), who had officially approved its use by amending the Laws of the Game to permit (but not require) its use. This followed a high-profile incident during a second-round game in the 2010 FIFA World Cup between England and Germany, where a shot by Englishman Frank Lampard, which would have levelled the scores at 2\u20132 in a match that ultimately ended in a 4\u20131 German victory, crossed the line but was not seen to do so by the match officials, which led FIFA officials to declare that they would re-examine the use of goal-line technology.\nControversy.\nThe 2015 FIFA corruption scandal exposed a widespread bribery and corruption scheme within the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the governing body of international football. This scandal implicated over two dozen FIFA officials and associates in a 24-year self-enrichment scheme that reached the highest levels of FIFA management. Accusations included bribery related to the awarding of hosting rights for the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to Qatar.\nOn 27 May 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice indicted 14 FIFA officials and marketing executives, charging them with receiving approximately $150 million in bribes over two decades. The scandal led to the arrest of several high-ranking FIFA officials, including vice presidents Jeffrey Webb and Eugenio Figueredo. Although FIFA president Sepp Blatter was not initially named in the criminal investigation, he resigned shortly after being re-elected for a fifth term.\nFurther investigations uncovered additional corruption, resulting in suspensions and bans for several FIFA executives, including Blatter, Michel Platini, and J\u00e9r\u00f4me Valcke. The scandal highlighted an organizational culture within FIFA characterized by greed, secrecy, and corruption, severely damaging its reputation and prompting widespread calls for significant reforms in the governance of international football.\nOn 28 February 2022, due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and by a recommendation by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), FIFA suspended the participation of Russia. The Russian Football Union unsuccessfully appealed the FIFA ban to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which upheld the ban. Some observers, while approving of the boycott of Russia, have pointed out that FIFA did not boycott Saddam Hussein's Iraq as an aggressor during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Saudi Arabia for its military intervention in Yemen, Qatar for its human rights violations, or the United States for the actions of the US military during the Iraq War.\nFIFA previously banned Indonesia due to government intervention within the team. FIFA requires members to play \"with no influence from third parties\".\nOn 23 October 2024, a new controversy came up as allegations against FIFA were made by players from several countries claiming the organization did not pay them agreed sums of money. The total reaching with sums reaching up to \u00a33m. According to reports Four hundred and twenty players did not get paid as agreed with FIFA.\nRecognition and awards.\nFIFA holds an annual awards ceremony, The Best FIFA Football Awards since 2016, which recognizes both individual and team achievements in international association football. Individually, the top men's player is awarded The Best FIFA Men's Player, and the top women's player is The Best FIFA Women's Player. Other prominent awards are The Best FIFA Football Coach and FIFA FIFPRO World 11.\nIn 2000, FIFA presented two awards, FIFA Club of the Century and FIFA Player of the Century, to decide the greatest football club and player of the 20th century. Real Madrid was the club winner, while Diego Maradona and Pel\u00e9 were the joint player's winners.\nTournaments.\nNational teams.\nMen's\nWomen's\nClubs.\nMen's\nWomen's\neSports.\nIndividual\nTeam\nCurrent title holders.\neSports.\n&lt;!--===Continental club champions===\n!Region\n!Competition\n!Year\n!Champion\n!Title\n!Runner-up\n!Next edition\n! colspan=9|Men's club competitions"}
{"id": "11052", "revid": "48546149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11052", "title": "List of presidents of FIFA", "text": "The following is a list of presidents of the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the world association football governing body.\nPresidents Daniel Burley Woolfall, Rodolphe Seeldrayers, and Arthur Drewry died during their term in office.\nThe current president is Swiss-Italian Gianni Infantino, elected on 26 February 2016 during an extraordinary session of the FIFA Congress. Prior to his election, Cameroonian Issa Hayatou was acting president after the impeachment of Sepp Blatter on 8 October 2015, who was given an eight-year ban from all football-related activities on 21 December 2015 (reduced to six years on 24 February 2016), which was renewed for six years on 24 March 2021.\nPresidents of FIFA.\nNotes"}
{"id": "11053", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11053", "title": "Frontline tv series", "text": ""}
{"id": "11054", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11054", "title": "Fascism", "text": "Fascism ( ) is a far-right, authoritarian, and ultranationalist political ideology and movement, characterized by a dictatorial leader, centralized autocracy, militarism, forcible suppression of opposition, belief in a natural social hierarchy, subordination of individual interests for the perceived good of the nation or race, and strong regimentation of society and the economy. Opposed to Marxism, democracy, anarchism, pluralism, free markets, egalitarianism, communism, liberalism, and socialism, fascism is at the far right of the traditional left\u2013right spectrum.\nFascism rose to prominence in early-20th-century Europe. The first fascist movements emerged in Italy during World War I, before spreading to other European countries, most notably Germany. Fascism also had adherents outside of Europe. Fascists saw World War I as a revolution that brought massive changes to the nature of war, society, the state, and technology. The advent of total war and the mass mobilization of society erased the distinction between civilians and combatants. A military citizenship arose, in which all citizens were involved with the military in some manner. The war resulted in the rise of a powerful state capable of mobilizing millions of people to serve on the front lines, providing logistics to support them, and having unprecedented authority to intervene in the lives of citizens.\nFascism rejects the view that violence is inherently negative or pointless but rather views imperialism, political violence, and war as means to national rejuvenation. Fascists often advocate for the establishment of a totalitarian one-party state, and for a dirigiste economy (a market economy in which the state plays a strong directive role through economic interventionist policies), with the principal goal of achieving autarky (national economic self-sufficiency). Fascism's extreme authoritarianism and nationalism can manifest as a belief in Manifest Destiny or a revival of historical greatness (like Mussolini seeking to restore the Roman Empire). It may also centre around an ingroup-outgroup opposition. In the case of Nazism, this involved racial purity and a master race which blended with a variant of racism and discrimination against a demonized \"Other\", such as Jews and other groups. Other marginalized groups such as homosexuals, transgender people, ethnic minorities, or immigrants have been targeted. Such bigotry has motivated fascist regimes to commit massacres, forced sterilizations, deportations, and genocides. During World War II, the genocidal and imperialist ambitions of the fascist Axis powers resulted in the murder of millions of people.\nSince the end of World War II in 1945, fascism has been largely disgraced, and few parties have openly described themselves as \"fascist\"; the term is often used pejoratively by political opponents. The descriptions \"neo-fascist\" or \"post-fascist\" are sometimes applied to contemporary parties with ideologies similar to, or rooted in, 20th-century fascist movements. Some opposition groups have adopted the label anti-fascist (often shortened to antifa) to signify their stance.\nEtymology.\nThe Italian term is derived from , meaning 'bundle of sticks', ultimately from the Latin word . This was the name given to political organizations in Italy known as fasci, groups similar to guilds or syndicates. According to Italian fascist dictator Benito Mussolini's own account, the Fasces of Revolutionary Action were founded in Italy in 1915. In 1919, Mussolini founded the Italian Fasces of Combat in Milan, which became the National Fascist Party two years later. The fascists came to associate the term with the ancient Roman fasces or , a bundle of rods tied around an axe, an ancient Roman symbol of the authority of the civic magistrate, carried by his lictors. The symbolism of the fasces suggested strength through unity: a single rod is easily broken, while the bundle is difficult to break. \nPrior to 1914, the fasces symbol was widely employed by various political movements, often of a left-wing or liberal persuasion. For instance, according to Robert Paxton, \"Marianne, symbol of the French Republic, was often portrayed in the nineteenth century carrying the fasces to represent the force of Republican solidarity against her aristocratic and clerical enemies.\" The symbol often appeared as an architectural motif, for instance on the Sheldonian Theater at Oxford University and on the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.\nDefinitions.\nHistorian Ian Kershaw once wrote that \"trying to define 'fascism' is like trying to nail jelly to the wall.\" Each group described as \"fascist\" has at least some unique elements, and frequently definitions of \"fascism\" have been criticized as either too broad or too narrow. According to many scholars, fascists\u2014especially when they are in power\u2014have historically attacked communism, socialism, conservatism, and parliamentary liberalism, attracting support primarily from the far-right.\nHistorian Stanley G. Payne's definition is frequently cited as standard by notable scholars, such as Roger Griffin, Randall Schweller, Bo Rothstein, Federico Finchelstein, and , His definition of fascism focuses on three concepts:\nUmberto Eco lists fourteen \"features that are typical of what [he] would like to call 'Ur-Fascism', or 'Eternal Fascism'. These features cannot be organized into a system; many of them contradict each other, and are also typical of other kinds of despotism or fanaticism. But it is enough that one of them be present to allow fascism to coagulate around it.\" Historian John Lukacs argues that there is no such thing as generic fascism. He claims that Nazism and communism are essentially manifestations of populism, and that states such as Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy are more different from each other than they are similar.\nIn his book \"\" (2018), Jason Stanley defined fascism thusly: [A] cult of the leader who promises national restoration in the face of humiliation brought on by supposed communists, Marxists and minorities and immigrants who are supposedly posing a threat to the character and the history of a nation ... The leader proposes that only he can solve it and all of his political opponents are enemies or traitors. Stanley says recent global events , including the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2020\u20132022 United States racial unrest, have substantiated his concern about how fascist rhetoric is showing up in politics and policies around the world.\nRoger Griffin describes fascism as \"a genus of political ideology whose mythic core in its various permutations is a palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism.\" Without palingenetic ultranationalism, there is no \"genuine fascism\" according to Griffin. Griffin further describes fascism as having three core components: \"(i) the rebirth myth, (ii) populist ultra-nationalism, and (iii) the myth of decadence.\" In Griffin's view, fascism is \"a genuinely revolutionary, trans-class form of anti-liberal, and in the last analysis, anti-conservative nationalism\" built on a complex range of theoretical and cultural influences. He distinguishes an inter-war period in which it manifested itself in elite-led but populist \"armed party\" politics opposing socialism and liberalism, and promising radical politics to rescue the nation from decadence.\nKershaw argues that the difference between fascism and other forms of right-wing authoritarianism in the interwar period is that the latter generally aimed \"to conserve the existing social order\", whereas fascism was \"revolutionary\", seeking to change society and obtain \"total commitment\" from the population. In \"Against the Fascist Creep\", Alexander Reid Ross writes regarding Griffin's view: \"Following the Cold War and shifts in fascist organizing techniques, a number of scholars have moved toward the minimalist 'new consensus' refined by Roger Griffin: 'the mythic core' of fascism is 'a populist form of palingenetic ultranationalism.' That means that fascism is an ideology that draws on old, ancient, and even arcane myths of racial, cultural, ethnic, and national origins to develop a plan for the 'new man. Griffin himself explored this 'mythic' or 'eliminable' core of fascism with his concept of \"post-fascism\" to explore the continuation of Nazism in the modern era. Additionally, other historians have applied this minimalist core to explore \"proto-fascist\" movements.\nCas Mudde and Crist\u00f3bal Rovira Kaltwasser argue that although fascism \"flirted with populism ... in an attempt to generate mass support\", it is better seen as an elitist ideology. They cite in particular its exaltation of the Leader, the race, and the state, rather than the people. They see populism as a \"thin-centered ideology\" with a \"restricted morphology\" that necessarily becomes attached to \"thick-centered\" ideologies such as fascism, liberalism, or socialism. Thus populism can be found as an aspect of many specific ideologies, without necessarily being a defining characteristic of those ideologies. They refer to the combination of populism, authoritarianism and ultranationalism as \"a marriage of convenience\".\nRobert Paxton says: [Fascism is] a form of political behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation, or victimhood and by compensatory cults of unity, energy, and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints goals of internal cleansing and external expansion.\nRoger Eatwell defines fascism as \"an ideology that strives to forge social rebirth based on a holistic-national radical Third Way\", while Walter Laqueur sees the core tenets of fascism as \"self-evident: nationalism; social Darwinism; racialism, the need for leadership, a new aristocracy, and obedience; and the negation of the ideals of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution.\"\nHistorian Emilio Gentile has defined fascism thusly:\n[A] modern political phenomenon, revolutionary, anti-liberal, and anti-Marxist, organized in a militia party with a totalitarian conception of politics and the state, an activist and anti-theoretical ideology, with a mythical, virilistic and anti-hedonistic foundation, sacralized as a secular religion, which affirms the absolute primacy of the nation, understood as an ethnically homogeneous organic community, hierarchically organized in a corporate state, with a bellicose vocation to the politics of greatness, power, and conquest aimed at creating a new order and a new civilization.\nHistorian and cultural critic Ruth Ben-Ghiat has described fascism as \"the original phase of authoritarianism, along with early communism, when a population has undergone huge dislocations or they perceive that there's been changes in society that are very rapid, too rapid for their taste\".\nRacism was a key feature of German fascism, for which the Holocaust was a high priority. According to \"The Historiography of Genocide\", \"In dealing with the Holocaust, it is the consensus of historians that Nazi Germany targeted Jews as a race, not as a religious group.\" Several historians, such as Umberto Eco, Kevin Passmore, and Moyra Grant, stress racism as a characteristic component of German fascism. Historian Robert Soucy stated that \"Hitler envisioned the ideal German society as a , a racially unified and hierarchically organized body in which the interests of individuals would be strictly subordinate to those of the nation, or Volk.\" Kershaw noted that common factors of fascism included \"the 'cleansing' of all those deemed not to belong\u2014foreigners, ethnic minorities, 'undesirables and belief in its own nation's superiority, even if it was not biological racism like in Nazism. Fascist philosophies vary by application, but remain distinct by one theoretical commonality: all traditionally fall into the far-right sector of any political spectrum, catalyzed by afflicted class identities over conventional social inequities.\nAccording to the Council on Foreign Relations, many experts see fascism as a mass political movement centered around extreme nationalism, militarism, and the placement of national interests above those of the individual. Fascist regimes often advocate for the overthrow of institutions that they view as \"liberal decay\" while simultaneously promoting traditional values. They believe in the supremacy of certain peoples and use it to justify the persecution of other groups. Fascist leaders often maintain a cult of personality and seek to generate enthusiasm for the regime by rallying massive crowds. This contrasts with authoritarian governments, which also centralize power and suppress dissent, but want their subjects to remain passive and demobilized.\nPosition on the political spectrum.\nScholars place fascism on the far right of the political spectrum. Such scholarship focuses on its social conservatism and its authoritarian means of opposing egalitarianism. Roderick Stackelberg places fascism\u2014including Nazism, which he says is \"a radical variant of fascism\"\u2014on the political right by explaining: \"The more a person deems absolute equality among all people to be a desirable condition, the further left he or she will be on the ideological spectrum. The more a person considers inequality to be unavoidable or even desirable, the further to the right he or she will be.\"\nFascism's origins are complex and include many seemingly contradictory viewpoints, ultimately centered on a mythos of national rebirth from decadence. Fascism was founded during World War I by Italian national syndicalists who drew upon both left-wing organizational tactics and right-wing political views. Italian fascism gravitated to the right in the early 1920s. A major element of fascist ideology that has been deemed to be far right is its stated goal to promote the right of a supposedly superior people to dominate, while purging society of supposedly inferior elements.\nIn the 1920s, Mussolini and Giovanni Gentile described their ideology as right-wing in the political essay \"The Doctrine of Fascism\", stating: \"We are free to believe that this is the century of authority, a century tending to the 'right,' a fascist century.\" Mussolini stated that fascism's position on the political spectrum was not a serious issue for fascists: \"[F]ascism, sitting on the right, could also have sat on the mountain of the center. ... These words in any case do not have a fixed and unchanged meaning: they do have a variable subject to location, time and spirit. We don't give a damn about these empty terminologies and we despise those who are terrorized by these words.\"\nMajor Italian groups politically on the right, especially rich landowners and big business, feared an uprising by groups on the left, such as sharecroppers and labour unions. They welcomed fascism and supported its violent suppression of opponents on the left. The accommodation of the political right into the Italian Fascist movement in the early 1920s created internal factions within the movement. The \"fascist left\" included Michele Bianchi, Giuseppe Bottai, Angelo Oliviero Olivetti, Sergio Panunzio, and Edmondo Rossoni, who were committed to advancing national syndicalism as a replacement for parliamentary liberalism in order to modernize the economy and advance the interests of workers and the common people. The \"fascist right\" included members of the paramilitary Blackshirts and former members of the Italian Nationalist Association (ANI). The Blackshirts wanted to establish fascism as a complete dictatorship, while the former ANI members, including Alfredo Rocco, sought to institute an authoritarian corporatist state to replace the liberal state in Italy while retaining the existing elites. Upon accommodating the political right, there arose a group of monarchist fascists who sought to use fascism to create an absolute monarchy under King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.\nA number of post-World War II fascist movements described themselves as a Third Position outside the traditional political spectrum. Falange Espa\u00f1ola de las JONS leader Jos\u00e9 Antonio Primo de Rivera said: \"[B]asically the Right stands for the maintenance of an economic structure, albeit an unjust one, while the Left stands for the attempt to subvert that economic structure, even though the subversion thereof would entail the destruction of much that was worthwhile.\"\n\"Fascist\" as a pejorative.\nThe term \"fascist\" has been used as a pejorative, regarding varying movements across the far right of the political spectrum. George Orwell noted in 1944 that the term had been used to denigrate diverse positions \"in internal politics\". Orwell said that while fascism is \"a political and economic system\" that was inconvenient to define, \"\"as used\", the word 'Fascism' is almost entirely meaningless. ... almost any English person would accept 'bully' as a synonym for 'Fascist, and in 1946 wrote that Fascism' has now no meaning except in so far as it signifies something not desirable.\" Richard Griffiths of the University of Wales wrote in 2000 that \"fascism\" is the \"most misused, and over-used word, of our times\". \"Fascist\" is sometimes applied to post-World War II organizations and ways of thinking that academics more commonly term \"neo-fascist\".\nDespite fascist movements' history of anti-communism, Communist states have sometimes been referred to as \"fascist\", typically as an insult. It has been applied to Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes in Cuba under Fidel Castro and Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh. Chinese Marxists used the term to denounce the Soviet Union during the Sino-Soviet split, and the Soviets used the term to denounce Chinese Marxists, in addition to social democracy, coining a new term in \"social fascism\". In the United States, Herbert Matthews of \"The New York Times\" asked in 1946: \"Should we now place Stalinist Russia in the same category as Hitlerite Germany? Should we say that she is Fascist?\" J. Edgar Hoover, longtime FBI director and ardent anti-communist, wrote extensively of red fascism. The Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s was sometimes called \"fascist\". Historian Peter Amann states that, \"Undeniably, the Klan had some traits in common with European fascism\u2014chauvinism, racism, a mystique of violence, an affirmation of a certain kind of archaic traditionalism\u2014yet their differences were fundamental ... [the KKK] never envisioned a change of political or economic system.\"\nHistory.\nBackground and 19th-century roots.\nEarly influences that shaped the ideology of fascism have been dated back to ancient Greece. The political culture of ancient Greece and specifically the ancient Greek city state of Sparta under Lycurgus, with its emphasis on militarism and racial purity, were admired by the Nazis. Nazi \"F\u00fchrer\" Adolf Hitler emphasized that Germany should adhere to Hellenic values and culture \u2013 particularly that of ancient Sparta.\nGeorges Valois, founder of the first non-Italian fascist party Faisceau, claimed the roots of fascism stemmed from the late 18th century Jacobin movement, seeing in its totalitarian nature a foreshadowing of the fascist state. Historian George Mosse similarly analyzed fascism as an inheritor of the mass ideology and civil religion of the French Revolution, as well as a result of the brutalization of societies in 1914\u20131918.\nHistorians such as Irene Collins and Howard C Payne see Napoleon III, who ran a 'police state' and suppressed the media, as a forerunner of fascism. According to David Thomson, the Italian Risorgimento of 1871 led to the 'nemesis of fascism'. William L Shirer sees a continuity from the views of Fichte and Hegel, through Bismarck, to Hitler; Robert Gerwarth speaks of a 'direct line' from Bismarck to Hitler. Julian Dierkes sees fascism as a 'particularly violent form of imperialism'.\nMarcus Garvey, founder and leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, insisted that he and his organisation \"were the first fascists\". In 1938, C. L. R. James wrote \"all the things that Hitler was to do so well later, Marcus Garvey was doing in 1920 and 1921\".\nera and lead up to World War I (1880\u20131914).\nThe historian Zeev Sternhell has traced the ideological roots of fascism back to the 1880s and in particular to the theme of that time. The theme was based on a revolt against materialism, rationalism, positivism, bourgeois society, and democracy. The generation supported emotionalism, irrationalism, subjectivism, and vitalism. They regarded civilization as being in crisis, requiring a massive and total solution. Their intellectual school considered the individual as only one part of the larger collectivity, which should not be viewed as a numerical sum of atomized individuals. They condemned the rationalistic, liberal individualism of society and the dissolution of social links in bourgeois society.\nThe outlook was influenced by various intellectual developments, including Darwinian biology, , Arthur de Gobineau's racialism, Gustave Le Bon's psychology, and the philosophies of Friedrich Nietzsche, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Henri Bergson. Social Darwinism, which gained widespread acceptance, made no distinction between physical and social life, and viewed the human condition as being an unceasing struggle to achieve the survival of the fittest. It challenged positivism's claim of deliberate and rational choice as the determining behaviour of humans, with social Darwinism focusing on heredity, race, and environment. Its emphasis on biogroup identity and the role of organic relations within societies fostered the legitimacy and appeal of nationalism. New theories of social and political psychology also rejected the notion of human behaviour being governed by rational choice and instead claimed that emotion was more influential in political issues than reason. Nietzsche's argument that \"God is dead\" coincided with his attack on the \"herd mentality\" of Christianity, democracy, and modern collectivism, his concept of the , and his advocacy of the will to power as a primordial instinct, were major influences upon many of the generation. Bergson's claim of the existence of an , or vital instinct, centred upon free choice and rejected the processes of materialism and determinism; this challenged Marxism.\nIn his work \"The Ruling Class\" (1896), Gaetano Mosca developed the theory that claims that in all societies an \"organized minority\" would dominate and rule over an \"disorganized majority\", stating that there are only two classes in society, \"the governing\" (the organized minority) and \"the governed\" (the disorganized majority). He claims that the organized nature of the organized minority makes it irresistible to any individual of the disorganized majority.\nFrench nationalist and reactionary monarchist Charles Maurras influenced fascism. Maurras promoted what he called integral nationalism, which called for the organic unity of a nation, and insisted that a powerful monarch was an ideal leader of a nation. Maurras distrusted what he considered the democratic mystification of the popular will that created an impersonal collective subject. He claimed that a powerful monarch was a personified sovereign who could exercise authority to unite a nation's people. Maurras' integral nationalism was idealized by fascists, but modified into a modernized revolutionary form that was devoid of Maurras' monarchism.\nFrench revolutionary syndicalist Georges Sorel promoted the legitimacy of political violence in his work \"Reflections on Violence\" (1908) and other works in which he advocated radical syndicalist action to achieve a revolution to overthrow capitalism and the bourgeoisie through a general strike. In \"Reflections on Violence\", Sorel emphasized need for a revolutionary political religion. Also in his work \"The Illusions of Progress\", Sorel denounced democracy as reactionary, saying \"nothing is more aristocratic than democracy.\" By 1909, after the failure of a syndicalist general strike in France, Sorel and his supporters left the radical left and went to the radical right, where they sought to merge militant Catholicism and French patriotism with their views\u2014advocating anti-republican Christian French patriots as ideal revolutionaries. Initially, Sorel had officially been a revisionist of Marxism, but by 1910 announced his abandonment of socialist literature and claimed in 1914, using an aphorism of Benedetto Croce that \"socialism is dead\" because of the \"decomposition of Marxism\". Sorel became a supporter of reactionary Maurrassian nationalism beginning in 1909 that influenced his works. Maurras held interest in merging his nationalist ideals with Sorelian syndicalism, known as Sorelianism, as a means to confront democracy. Maurras stated that \"a socialism liberated from the democratic and cosmopolitan element fits nationalism well as a well made glove fits a beautiful hand.\"\nThe fusion of Maurrassian nationalism and Sorelian syndicalism influenced radical Italian nationalist Enrico Corradini. Corradini spoke of the need for a nationalist-syndicalist movement, led by elitist aristocrats and anti-democrats who shared a revolutionary syndicalist commitment to direct action and a willingness to fight. Corradini spoke of Italy as being a \"proletarian nation\" that needed to pursue imperialism in order to challenge the \"plutocratic\" French and British. Corradini's views were part of a wider set of perceptions within the right-wing Italian Nationalist Association (ANI), which claimed that Italy's economic backwardness was caused by corruption in its political class, liberalism, and division caused by \"ignoble socialism\".\nThe ANI held ties and influence among conservatives, Catholics, and the business community. Italian national syndicalists held a common set of principles: the rejection of bourgeois values, democracy, liberalism, Marxism, internationalism, and pacifism, and the promotion of heroism, vitalism, and violence. The ANI claimed that liberal democracy was no longer compatible with the modern world, and advocated a strong state and imperialism. They believed that humans are naturally predatory, and that nations are in a constant struggle in which only the strongest would survive.\nFuturism was both an artistic-cultural movement and initially a political movement in Italy led by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti who founded the Manifesto of Futurism (1908), that championed the causes of modernism, action, and political violence as necessary elements of politics while denouncing liberalism and parliamentary politics. Marinetti rejected conventional democracy based on majority rule and egalitarianism, for a new form of democracy, promoting what he described in his work \"The Futurist Conception of Democracy\" as the following: \"We are therefore able to give the directions to create and to dismantle to numbers, to quantity, to the mass, for with us number, quantity and mass will never be\u2014as they are in Germany and Russia\u2014the number, quantity and mass of mediocre men, incapable and indecisive.\"\nFuturism influenced fascism in its emphasis on recognizing the virile nature of violent action and war as being necessities of modern civilization. Marinetti promoted the need of physical training of young men saying that, in male education, gymnastics should take precedence over books. He advocated segregation of the genders because womanly sensibility must not enter men's education, which he claimed must be \"lively, bellicose, muscular and violently dynamic.\"\nWorld War I and its aftermath (1914\u20131929).\nAt the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the Italian political left became severely split over its position on the war. The Italian Socialist Party (PSI) opposed the war but a number of Italian revolutionary syndicalists supported war against Germany and Austria-Hungary on the grounds that their reactionary regimes had to be defeated to ensure the success of socialism. Angelo Oliviero Olivetti formed a pro-interventionist \"fascio\" called the Revolutionary Fasces of International Action in October 1914. Benito Mussolini upon being expelled from his position as chief editor of the PSI's newspaper for his anti-German stance, joined the interventionist cause in a separate \"fascio\". The term \"fascism\" was first used in 1915 by members of Mussolini's movement, the Fasces of Revolutionary Action.\nThe first meeting of the Fasces of Revolutionary Action was held on 24 January 1915 when Mussolini declared that it was necessary for Europe to resolve its national problems\u2014including national borders\u2014of Italy and elsewhere \"for the ideals of justice and liberty for which oppressed peoples must acquire the right to belong to those national communities from which they descended.\" Attempts to hold mass meetings were ineffective and the organization was regularly harassed by government authorities and socialists.\nSimilar political ideas arose in Germany after the outbreak of the war. German sociologist Johann Plenge spoke of the rise of a \"National Socialism\" in Germany within what he termed the \"ideas of 1914\" that were a declaration of war against the \"ideas of 1789\" (the French Revolution). According to Plenge, the \"ideas of 1789\"\u2014such as the rights of man, democracy, individualism and liberalism\u2014were being rejected in favor of \"the ideas of 1914\" that included \"German values\" of duty, discipline, law and order. Plenge believed that racial solidarity () would replace class division and that \"racial comrades\" would unite to create a socialist society in the struggle of \"proletarian\" Germany against \"capitalist\" Britain. He believed that the Spirit of 1914 manifested itself in the concept of the People's League of National Socialism. This National Socialism was a form of state socialism that rejected the \"idea of boundless freedom\" and promoted an economy that would serve the whole of Germany under the leadership of the state. This National Socialism was opposed to capitalism because of the components that were against \"the national interest\" of Germany but insisted that National Socialism would strive for greater efficiency in the economy. Plenge advocated an authoritarian rational ruling elite to develop National Socialism through a hierarchical technocratic state.\nImpact of World War I.\nFascists viewed World War I as bringing revolutionary changes in the nature of war, society, the state and technology, as the advent of total war and mass mobilization had broken down the distinction between civilian and combatant, as civilians had become a critical part in economic production for the war effort and thus arose a \"military citizenship\" in which all citizens were involved to the military in some manner during the war. World War I had resulted in the rise of a powerful state capable of mobilizing millions of people to serve on the front lines or provide economic production and logistics to support those on the front lines, as well as having unprecedented authority to intervene in the lives of citizens. Fascists viewed technological developments of weaponry and the state's total mobilization of its population in the war as symbolizing the beginning of a new era fusing state power with mass politics, technology and particularly the mobilizing myth that they contended had triumphed over the myth of progress and the era of liberalism.\nImpact of the Bolshevik Revolution.\nThe October Revolution of 1917, in which Bolshevik communists led by Vladimir Lenin seized power in Russia, greatly influenced the development of fascism. Leon Trotsky would later formulate a theory of fascism based on a dialectical interpretation of events to analyze the manifestation of Italian fascism and the early emergence of Nazi Germany from 1930 to 1933. In 1917, Mussolini, as leader of the Fasces of Revolutionary Action, praised the October Revolution, but later he became unimpressed with Lenin, regarding him as merely a new version of Tsar Nicholas II. After World War I, fascists commonly campaigned on anti-Marxist agendas.\nBritish historian Cyprian Blamires argues that there are similarities between fascism and Bolshevism, including that they believed in the necessity of a vanguard leadership, showed contempt for bourgeois values, and had totalitarian ambitions. In practice, both have commonly emphasized revolutionary action, proletarian nation theories, one-party states, and party-armies; With the antagonism between anti-interventionist Marxists and pro-interventionist fascists complete by the end of the war, the two sides became irreconcilable. The fascists presented themselves as anti-communists and as especially opposed to the Marxists. In 1919, Mussolini consolidated control over the fascist movement, known as , with the founding of the \"Italian Fasces of Combat\".\nFascist Manifesto and Charter of Carnaro.\nIn 1919, Alceste De Ambris and futurist movement leader Filippo Tommaso Marinetti created \"The Manifesto of the Italian Fasces of Combat\". The Fascist Manifesto was presented on 6 June 1919 in the fascist newspaper and supported the creation of universal suffrage, including women's suffrage (the latter being realized only partly in late 1925, with all opposition parties banned or disbanded); proportional representation on a regional basis; government representation through a corporatist system of \"National Councils\" of experts, selected from professionals and tradespeople, elected to represent and hold legislative power over their respective areas, including labour, industry, transportation, public health, and communications, among others; and abolition of the Senate of the Kingdom of Italy. The Fascist Manifesto supported the creation of an eight-hour work day for all workers, a minimum wage, worker representation in industrial management, equal confidence in labour unions as in industrial executives and public servants, reorganization of the transportation sector, revision of the draft law on invalidity insurance, reduction of the retirement age from 65 to 55, a strong progressive tax on capital, confiscation of the property of religious institutions and abolishment of bishoprics, and revision of military contracts to allow the government to seize 85% of profits. It also called for the fulfillment of expansionist aims in the Balkans and other parts of the Mediterranean, the creation of a short-service national militia to serve defensive duties, nationalization of the armaments industry, and a foreign policy designed to be peaceful but also competitive.\nThe next events that influenced the fascists in Italy were the raid of Fiume by Italian nationalist Gabriele d'Annunzio and the founding of the Charter of Carnaro in 1920. D'Annunzio and De Ambris designed the Charter, which advocated national-syndicalist corporatist productionism alongside D'Annunzio's political views. Many fascists saw the Charter of Carnaro as an ideal constitution for a fascist Italy. This behaviour of aggression towards Yugoslavia and South Slavs was pursued by Italian fascists with their persecution of South Slavs\u2014especially Slovenes and Croats.\nFrom populism to conservative accommodations.\nIn 1920, militant strike activity by industrial workers reached its peak in Italy and 1919 and 1920 were known as the \"Red Year\" (). Mussolini and the fascists took advantage of the situation by allying with industrial businesses and attacking workers and peasants in the name of preserving order and internal peace in Italy.\nFascists identified their primary opponents as the majority of socialists on the left who had opposed intervention in World War I. The fascists and the Italian political right held common ground: both held Marxism in contempt, discounted class consciousness and believed in the rule of elites. The fascists assisted the anti-socialist campaign by allying with the other parties and the conservative right in a mutual effort to destroy the Italian Socialist Party and labour organizations committed to class identity above national identity.\nFascism sought to accommodate Italian conservatives by making major alterations to its political agenda\u2014abandoning its previous populism, republicanism and anticlericalism, adopting policies in support of free enterprise and accepting the Catholic Church and the monarchy as institutions in Italy. To appeal to Italian conservatives, fascism adopted policies such as promoting family values, including policies designed to reduce the number of women in the workforce\u2014limiting the woman's role to that of a mother. The fascists banned literature on birth control and increased penalties for abortion in 1926, declaring both crimes against the state.\nAlthough fascism adopted a number of anti-modern positions designed to appeal to people upset with the new trends in sexuality and women's rights\u2014especially those with a reactionary point of view\u2014the fascists sought to maintain fascism's revolutionary character, with Angelo Oliviero Olivetti saying: \"Fascism would like to be conservative, but it will [be] by being revolutionary.\" The Fascists supported revolutionary action and committed to secure law and order to appeal to both conservatives and syndicalists.\nPrior to fascism's accommodations to the political right, fascism was a small, urban, northern Italian movement that had about a thousand members. After Fascism's accommodation of the political right, the fascist movement's membership soared to approximately 250,000 by 1921. A 2020 article by Daron Acemo\u011flu, Giuseppe De Feo, Giacomo De Luca, and Gianluca Russo in the Center for Economic and Policy Research, exploring the link between the threat of socialism and Mussolini's rise to power, found \"a strong association between the Red Scare in Italy and the subsequent local support for the Fascist Party in the early 1920s.\" According to the authors, it was local elites and large landowners who played an important role in boosting Fascist Party activity and support, which did not come from socialists' core supporters but from centre-right voters, as they viewed traditional centre-right parties as ineffective in stopping socialism and turned to the Fascists. In 2003, historian Adrian Lyttelton wrote: \"The expansion of Fascism in the rural areas was stimulated and directed by the reaction of the farmers and landowners against the peasant leagues of both Socialists and Catholics.\"\nFascist violence.\nBeginning in 1922, fascist paramilitaries escalated their strategy from one of attacking socialist offices and the homes of socialist leadership figures, to one of violent occupation of cities. The fascists met little serious resistance from authorities and proceeded to take over several northern Italian cities. The fascists attacked the headquarters of socialist and Catholic labour unions in Cremona and imposed forced Italianization upon the German-speaking population of Bolzano. After seizing these cities, the fascists made plans to take Rome.\nOn 24 October 1922, the Fascist Party held its annual congress in Naples, where Mussolini ordered Blackshirts to take control of public buildings and trains and to converge on three points around Rome. The Fascists managed to seize control of several post offices and trains in northern Italy while the Italian government, led by a left-wing coalition, was internally divided and unable to respond to the Fascist advances. King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy perceived the risk of bloodshed in Rome in response to attempting to disperse the Fascists to be too high. Victor Emmanuel III decided to appoint Mussolini as Prime Minister of Italy and Mussolini arrived in Rome on 30 October to accept the appointment. Fascist propaganda aggrandized this event, known as \"March on Rome\", as a \"seizure\" of power because of Fascists' heroic exploits.\nFascist Italy.\nHistorian Stanley G. Payne says:\n[Fascism in Italy was a] primarily political dictatorship. ... The Fascist Party itself had become almost completely bureaucratized and subservient to, not dominant over, the state itself. Big business, industry, and finance retained extensive autonomy, particularly in the early years. The armed forces also enjoyed considerable autonomy. ... The Fascist militia was placed under military control. ... The judicial system was left largely intact and relatively autonomous as well. The police continued to be directed by state officials and were not taken over by party leaders ... nor was a major new police elite created. ... There was never any question of bringing the Church under overall subservience. ... Sizable sectors of Italian cultural life retained extensive autonomy, and no major state propaganda-and-culture ministry existed. ... The Mussolini regime was neither especially sanguinary nor particularly repressive.\nMussolini in power.\nUpon being appointed Prime Minister of Italy, Mussolini had to form a coalition government because the fascists did not have control over the Italian parliament. Mussolini's coalition government initially pursued economically liberal policies under the direction of liberal finance minister Alberto De Stefani, a member of the Center Party, including balancing the budget through deep cuts to the civil service. Initially, little drastic change in government policy had occurred and repressive police actions were limited.\nThe fascists began their attempt to entrench fascism in Italy with the Acerbo Law, which guaranteed a plurality of the seats in parliament to any party or coalition list in an election that received 25% or more of the vote. Through considerable fascist violence and intimidation, the list won a majority of the vote, allowing many seats to go to the fascists. In the aftermath of the election, a crisis and political scandal erupted after Socialist Party deputy Giacomo Matteotti was kidnapped and murdered by a Fascist. The liberals and the leftist minority in parliament walked out in protest in what became known as the Aventine Secession. On 3 January 1925, Mussolini addressed the Fascist-dominated Italian parliament and declared that he was personally responsible for what happened, but insisted that he had done nothing wrong. Mussolini proclaimed himself dictator of Italy, assuming full responsibility over the government and announcing the dismissal of parliament. From 1925 to 1929, fascism steadily became entrenched in power: opposition deputies were denied access to parliament, censorship was introduced and a December 1925 decree made Mussolini solely responsible to the King.\nCatholic Church.\nIn 1929, the fascist regime briefly gained what was in effect a blessing of the Catholic Church after the regime signed a concordat with the Church, known as the Lateran Treaty, which gave the papacy state sovereignty and financial compensation for the seizure of Church lands by the liberal state in the 19th century, but within two years the Church had renounced fascism in the Encyclical \"Non Abbiamo Bisogno\" as a \"pagan idolatry of the state\" which teaches \"hatred, violence and irreverence\". Not long after signing the agreement, by Mussolini's own confession, the Church had threatened to have him \"excommunicated\", in part because of his intractable nature, but also because he had \"confiscated more issues of Catholic newspapers in the next three months than in the previous seven years.\" By the late 1930s, Mussolini became more vocal in his anti-clerical rhetoric, repeatedly denouncing the Catholic Church and discussing ways to depose the pope. He took the position that the \"papacy was a malignant tumor in the body of Italy and must 'be rooted out once and for all,' because there was no room in Rome for both the Pope and himself.\" In her 1974 book, Mussolini's widow Rachele stated that her husband had always been an atheist until near the end of his life, writing that her husband was \"basically irreligious until the later years of his life.\"\nThe Nazis in Germany employed similar anti-clerical policies. The Gestapo confiscated hundreds of monasteries in Austria and Germany, evicted clergymen and laymen alike and often replaced crosses with swastikas. Referring to the swastika as \"the Devil's Cross\", church leaders found their youth organizations banned, their meetings limited and various Catholic periodicals censored or banned. Government officials eventually found it necessary to place \"Nazis into editorial positions in the Catholic press.\" Up to 2,720 clerics, mostly Catholics, were arrested by the Gestapo and imprisoned inside of Germany's Dachau concentration camp, resulting in over 1,000 deaths.\nCorporatist economic system.\nThe fascist regime created a corporatist economic system in 1925 with creation of the Palazzo Vidoni Pact, in which the Italian employers' association Confindustria and fascist trade unions agreed to recognize each other as the sole representatives of Italy's employers and employees, excluding non-fascist trade unions. The Fascist regime first created a Ministry of Corporations that organized the Italian economy into 22 sectoral corporations, banned workers' strikes and lock-outs and in 1927 created the Charter of Labour, which established workers' rights and duties and created labour tribunals to arbitrate employer-employee disputes. In practice, the sectoral corporations exercised little independence and were largely controlled by the regime, and the employee organizations were rarely led by employees themselves, but instead by appointed Fascist party members.\nAggressive foreign policy.\nIn the 1920s, Fascist Italy pursued an aggressive foreign policy that included ambitions to expand Italian territory. In response to revolt in the Italian colony of Libya, Fascist Italy abandoned previous liberal-era colonial policy of cooperation with local leaders. Instead, claiming that Italians were a superior race to African races and thereby had the right to colonize the \"inferior\" Africans, it sought to settle 10 to 15 million Italians in Libya. This resulted in an aggressive military campaign known as the Pacification of Libya against natives in Libya, including mass killings, the use of concentration camps and the forced starvation of thousands of people. Italian authorities committed ethnic cleansing by forcibly expelling 100,000 Bedouin Cyrenaicans, half the population of Cyrenaica in Libya, from their settlements that was slated to be given to Italian settlers.\nNazi adoption of the Italian model.\nThe March on Rome brought fascism international attention. One early admirer of the Italian fascists was Adolf Hitler, who less than a month after the March had begun to model himself and the Nazi Party upon Mussolini and the Fascists. The Nazis, led by Hitler and the German war hero Erich Ludendorff, attempted a \"March on Berlin\" modeled upon the March on Rome, which resulted in the failed Beer Hall Putsch in Munich in November 1923.\nInternational impact of the Great Depression and buildup to World War II.\nThe conditions of economic hardship caused by the Great Depression brought about an international surge of social unrest. Fascist propaganda blamed the problems of the long depression of the 1930s on minorities and scapegoats: \"Judeo-Masonic-bolshevik\" conspiracies, left-wing internationalism and the presence of immigrants.\nIn Germany, it contributed to the rise of the Nazi Party, which resulted in the demise of the Weimar Republic and the establishment of the fascist regime, Nazi Germany, under the leadership of Adolf Hitler. With the rise of Hitler and the Nazis to power in 1933, liberal democracy was dissolved in Germany and the Nazis mobilized the country for war, with expansionist territorial aims against several countries. In the 1930s, the Nazis implemented racial laws that deliberately discriminated against, disenfranchised and persecuted Jews and other racial and minority groups.\nFascist movements grew in strength elsewhere in Europe. Hungarian fascist Gyula G\u00f6mb\u00f6s rose to power as Prime Minister of Hungary in 1932 and attempted to entrench his Party of National Unity throughout the country. He created an eight-hour work day and a forty-eight-hour work week in industry; sought to entrench a corporatist economy; and pursued irredentist claims on Hungary's neighbors. The fascist Iron Guard movement in Romania soared in political support after 1933, gaining representation in the Romanian government, and an Iron Guard member assassinated Romanian prime minister Ion Duca. The Iron Guard was the only fascist movement outside Germany and Italy to come to power without foreign assistance. During the 6 February 1934 crisis, France faced the greatest domestic political turmoil since the Dreyfus Affair when the fascist Francist Movement and multiple far-right movements rioted \"en masse\" in Paris against the French government resulting in major political violence. A variety of para-fascist governments that borrowed elements from fascism were formed during the Great Depression, including those of Greece, Lithuania, Poland and Yugoslavia. In the Netherlands, the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands was at its height in the 1930s due to the Great Depression, especially in 1935 when it won almost eight percent of votes, until the year 1937.\nIn the Americas, the Brazilian Integralists led by Pl\u00ednio Salgado claimed as many as 200,000 members, although following coup attempts it faced a crackdown from the Estado Novo of Get\u00falio Vargas in 1937. In Peru, the fascist Revolutionary Union was a fascist political party which was in power 1931 to 1933. In the 1930s, the National Socialist Movement of Chile gained seats in Chile's parliament and attempted a coup d'\u00e9tat that resulted in the Seguro Obrero massacre of 1938.\nDuring the Great Depression, Mussolini promoted active state intervention in the economy. He denounced the contemporary \"supercapitalism\" that he claimed began in 1914 as a failure because of its alleged decadence, its support for unlimited consumerism, and its intention to create the \"standardization of humankind.\" Fascist Italy created the Institute for Industrial Reconstruction (IRI), a giant state-owned firm and holding company that provided state funding to failing private enterprises. The IRI was made a permanent institution in Fascist Italy in 1937, pursued fascist policies to create national autarky and had the power to take over private firms to maximize war production. While Hitler's regime only nationalized 500 companies in key industries by the early 1940s, Mussolini declared in 1934 that \"[t]hree-fourths of Italian economy, industrial and agricultural, is in the hands of the state.\"\nDue to the worldwide depression, Mussolini's government was able to take over most of Italy's largest failing banks, who held controlling interest in many Italian businesses. The Institute for Industrial Reconstruction, a state-operated holding company in charge of bankrupt banks and companies, reported in early 1934 that they held assets of \"48.5 percent of the share capital of Italy\", which later included the capital of the banks themselves. Political historian Martin Blinkhorn estimated Italy's scope of state intervention and ownership \"greatly surpassed that in Nazi Germany, giving Italy a public sector second only to that of Stalin's Russia.\" In the late 1930s, Italy enacted manufacturing cartels, tariff barriers, currency restrictions and massive regulation of the economy to attempt to balance payments. Italy's policy of autarky failed to achieve effective economic autonomy. Nazi Germany similarly pursued an economic agenda with the aims of autarky and rearmament and imposed protectionist policies, including forcing the German steel industry to use lower-quality German iron ore rather than superior-quality imported iron.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nIn Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, both Mussolini and Hitler pursued territorial expansionist and interventionist foreign policy agendas from the 1930s through the 1940s culminating in World War II. From 1935 to 1939, Germany and Italy escalated their demands for territorial claims and greater influence in world affairs. Italy invaded Ethiopia in 1935 resulting in its condemnation by the League of Nations and its widespread diplomatic isolation. In 1936, Germany remilitarized the industrial Rhineland, a region that had been ordered demilitarized by the Treaty of Versailles. In 1938, Germany annexed Austria and Italy assisted Germany in resolving the diplomatic crisis between Germany versus Britain and France over claims on Czechoslovakia by arranging the Munich Agreement that gave Germany the Sudetenland and was perceived at the time to have averted a European war. These hopes faded when Czechoslovakia was dissolved by the proclamation of the German client state of Slovakia, followed by the next day of the occupation of the remaining Czech Lands and the proclamation of the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. At the same time from 1938 to 1939, Italy was demanding territorial and colonial concessions from France and Britain. In 1939, Germany prepared for war with Poland, but attempted to gain territorial concessions from Poland through diplomatic means. The Polish government did not trust Hitler's promises and refused to accept Germany's demands.\nThe invasion of Poland by Germany was deemed unacceptable by Britain, France and their allies, leading to their mutual declaration of war against Germany and the start of World War II. In 1940, Mussolini led Italy into World War II on the side of the Axis. During World War II, the Axis Powers in Europe led by Nazi Germany participated in the extermination of millions of Poles, Jews, Gypsies and others in the genocide known as the Holocaust. In 1943, after Italy faced multiple military failures, the complete reliance and subordination of Italy to Germany, the Allied invasion of Italy and the corresponding international humiliation, Mussolini was removed as head of government and arrested on the order of King Victor Emmanuel III, who proceeded to dismantle the Fascist state and declared Italy's switching of allegiance to the Allied side. Mussolini was rescued from arrest by German forces and led the German client state, the Italian Social Republic from 1943 to 1945. Nazi Germany faced multiple losses and steady Soviet and Western Allied offensives from 1943 to 1945.\nOn 28 April 1945, Mussolini was captured and executed by Italian communist partisans. On 30 April 1945, Hitler committed suicide. Shortly afterwards, Germany surrendered and the Nazi regime was systematically dismantled by the occupying Allied powers. An International Military Tribunal was subsequently convened in Nuremberg. Beginning in November 1945 and lasting through 1949, numerous Nazi political, military and economic leaders were tried and convicted of war crimes, with many of the worst offenders being sentenced to death and executed.\nPost-World War II (1945\u20132008).\nThe victory of the Allies over the Axis powers in World War II led to the collapse of many fascist regimes in Europe. The Nuremberg Trials convicted several Nazi leaders of crimes against humanity involving the Holocaust. However, there remained several movements and governments that were ideologically related to fascism.\nFrancisco Franco's Falangist one-party state in Spain was officially neutral during World War II, although Franco's rise to power had been directly assisted by the militaries of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany during the Spanish Civil War. The first years were characterized by a repression against the anti-fascist ideologies, deep censorship and the suppression of democratic institutions (elected Parliament, Spanish Constitution of 1931, Regional Statutes of Autonomy). After World War II and a period of international isolation, Franco's regime normalized relations with the Western powers during the Cold War, until Franco's death in 1975 and the transformation of Spain into a liberal democracy.\nHistorian Robert Paxton observes that one of the main problems in defining fascism is that it was widely mimicked. Paxton says: \"In fascism's heyday, in the 1930s, many regimes that were not functionally fascist borrowed elements of fascist decor in order to lend themselves an aura of force, vitality, and mass mobilization.\" He goes on to observe that Salazar \"crushed Portuguese fascism after he had copied some of its techniques of popular mobilization.\" Paxton says: \"Where Franco subjected Spain's fascist party to his personal control, Salazar abolished outright in July 1934 the nearest thing Portugal had to an authentic fascist movement, Rol\u00e3o Preto's blue-shirted National Syndicalists. ... Salazar preferred to control his population through such 'organic' institutions traditionally powerful in Portugal as the Church. Salazar's regime was not only non-fascist, but 'voluntarily non-totalitarian,' preferring to let those of its citizens who kept out of politics 'live by habit. However, historians tend to view the Estado Novo as para-fascist in nature, possessing minimal fascist tendencies. Other historians, including Fernando Rosas and Manuel Villaverde Cabral, think that the Estado Novo should be considered fascist.\nThe term neo-fascism refers to fascist movements after World War II. In Italy, the Italian Social Movement led by Giorgio Almirante was a major neo-fascist movement that transformed itself into a self-described \"post-fascist\" movement called the National Alliance (AN), which has been an ally of Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia for a decade. In 2008, AN joined Forza Italia in Berlusconi's new party The People of Freedom, but in 2012 a group of politicians split from The People of Freedom, refounding the party with the name Brothers of Italy. In Germany, various neo-Nazi movements have been formed and banned in accordance with Germany's constitutional law which forbids Nazism. The National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) is widely considered a neo-Nazi party, although the party does not publicly identify itself as such.\nIn Argentina, Peronism, associated with the regime of Juan Per\u00f3n from 1946 to 1955 and 1973 to 1974, was influenced by fascism. Between 1939 and 1941, prior to his rise to power, Per\u00f3n had developed a deep admiration of Italian Fascism and modelled his economic policies on Italian fascist policies. However, not all historians agree with this identification, which they consider debatable or even false, biased by a pejorative political position. Other authors, such as the Israeli Raanan Rein, categorically maintain that Per\u00f3n was not a fascist and that this characterization was imposed on him because of his defiant stance against US hegemony.\nContemporary fascism (2008\u2013present).\nGreece.\nAfter the onset of the Great Recession and economic crisis in Greece, a movement known as the Golden Dawn, widely considered a neo-Nazi party, soared in support out of obscurity and won seats in Greece's parliament, espousing a staunch hostility towards minorities, illegal immigrants and refugees. In 2013, after the murder of an anti-fascist musician by a person with links to Golden Dawn, the Greek government ordered the arrest of Golden Dawn's leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos and other members on charges related to being associated with a criminal organization. On 7 October 2020, Athens Appeals Court announced verdicts for 68 defendants, including the party's political leadership. Nikolaos Michaloliakos and six other prominent members and former members of parliament (MPs) were found guilty of running a criminal organization. Guilty verdicts were delivered on charges of murder, attempted murder, and violent attacks on immigrants and left-wing political opponents.\nPost-Soviet Russia.\nMarlene Laruelle, a French political scientist, contends in \"Is Russia Fascist?\" that the accusation of \"fascist\" has evolved into a strategic narrative of the existing world order. Geopolitical rivals might construct their own view of the world and assert the moral high ground by branding ideological rivals as fascists, regardless of their real ideals or deeds. Laruelle discusses the basis, significance, and veracity of accusations of fascism in and around Russia through an analysis of the domestic situation in Russia and the Kremlin's foreign policy justifications; she concludes that Russian efforts to brand its opponents as fascist is ultimately an attempt to determine the future of Russia in Europe as an antifascist force, influenced by its role in fighting fascism in World War II.\nAccording to Alexander J. Motyl, an American historian and political scientist, Russian fascism has the following characteristics:\nYale historian Timothy Snyder has stated that \"Putin's regime is ... the world center of fascism\" and has written an article entitled \"We Should Say It: Russia Is Fascist.\" Oxford historian Roger Griffin compared Putin's Russia to the World War II-era Empire of Japan, saying that like Putin's Russia, it \"emulated fascism in many ways, but was not fascist.\" Historian Stanley G. Payne says Putin's Russia \"is not equivalent to the fascist regimes of World War II, but it forms the nearest analogue to fascism found in a major country since that time\" and argues that Putin's political system is \"more a revival of the creed of Tsar Nicholas I in the 19th century that emphasized 'Orthodoxy, autocracy, and nationality' than one resembling the revolutionary, modernizing regimes of Hitler and Mussolini.\" According to Griffin, fascism is \"a revolutionary form of nationalism\" seeking to destroy the old system and remake society, and that Putin is a reactionary politician who is not trying to create a new order \"but to recreate a modified version of the Soviet Union\". German political scientist Andreas Umland said genuine fascists in Russia, like deceased politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky and activist and self-styled philosopher Aleksandr Dugin, \"describe in their writings a completely new Russia\" controlling parts of the world that were never under tsarist or Soviet domination. According to Marlene Laurelle writing in \"The Washington Quarterly\", \"applying the \"fascism\" label ... to the entirety of the Russian state or society short-circuits our ability to construct a more complex and differentiated picture.\"\nRadio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, collecting the opinions of experts on fascism, said that while Russia is repressive and authoritarian, it cannot be classified as a fascist state for various reasons, including Russia's government being more reactionary than revolutionary. In 2023, Oleg Orlov, the chairman of the Board of Human Rights Center \"Memorial\", claimed that Russia under Vladimir Putin had descended into fascism and that the army is committing \"mass murder\". On 7 March 2024, in his 2024 State of the Union Address, American President Joe Biden compared Russia under Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler's conquests of Europe.\nTenets.\nRobert O. Paxton finds that even though fascism \"maintained the existing regime of property and social hierarchy\", it cannot be considered \"simply a more muscular form of conservatism\" because \"fascism in power did carry out some changes profound enough to be called 'revolutionary. These transformations \"often set fascists into conflict with conservatives rooted in families, churches, social rank, and property.\" Paxton argues:\nfascism redrew the frontiers between private and public, sharply diminishing what had once been untouchably private. It changed the practice of citizenship from the enjoyment of constitutional rights and duties to participation in mass ceremonies of affirmation and conformity. It reconfigured relations between the individual and the collectivity, so that an individual had no rights outside community interest. It expanded the powers of the executive\u2014party and state\u2014in a bid for total control. Finally, it unleashed aggressive emotions hitherto known in Europe only during war or social revolution.\nUltranationalism.\nUltranationalism, combined with the myth of national rebirth, is a key foundation of fascism. Robert Paxton argues that \"a passionate nationalism\" is the basis of fascism, combined with \"a conspiratorial and Manichean view of history\" which holds that \"the chosen people have been weakened by political parties, social classes, unassimilable minorities, spoiled rentiers, and rationalist thinkers.\" Roger Griffin identifies the core of fascism as being palingenetic ultranationalism.\nThe fascist view of a nation is of a single organic entity that binds people together by their ancestry and is a natural unifying force of people. Fascism seeks to solve economic, political, and social problems by achieving a millenarian national rebirth, exalting the nation or race above all else and promoting cults of unity, strength, and purity. European fascist movements typically espouse a racist conception of non-Europeans being inferior to Europeans. Beyond this, European fascists have not held a unified set of racial views. Historically, most fascists promoted imperialism, although there have been several fascist movements that were uninterested in the pursuit of new imperial ambitions. For example, Nazism and Italian Fascism were expansionist and irredentist. Falangism in Spain envisioned the worldwide unification of Spanish-speaking peoples (). British Fascism was non-interventionist, though it did embrace the British Empire.\nTotalitarianism.\nFascism promotes the establishment of a totalitarian state. It opposes liberal democracy, rejects multi-party systems, and may support a one-party state so that it may synthesize with the nation. Mussolini's \"The Doctrine of Fascism\" (1932), partly ghostwritten by philosopher Giovanni Gentile, who Mussolini described as \"the philosopher of Fascism\", states: \"The Fascist conception of the State is all-embracing; outside of it no human or spiritual values can exist, much less have value. Thus understood, Fascism is totalitarian, and the Fascist State\u2014a synthesis and a unit inclusive of all values\u2014interprets, develops, and potentiates the whole life of a people.\" In \"The Legal Basis of the Total State\", Nazi political theorist Carl Schmitt described the Nazi intention to form a \"strong state which guarantees a totality of political unity transcending all diversity\" in order to avoid a \"disastrous pluralism tearing the German people apart.\"\nFascist states pursued policies of social indoctrination through propaganda in education and the media, and regulation of the production of educational and media materials. Education was designed to glorify the fascist movement and inform students of its historical and political importance to the nation. It attempted to purge ideas that were not consistent with the beliefs of the fascist movement and to teach students to be obedient to the state.\nEconomy.\nHistorians and other scholars disagree on the question of whether a specifically fascist type of economic policy can be said to exist. David Baker argues that there is an identifiable economic system in fascism that is distinct from those advocated by other ideologies, comprising essential characteristics that fascist nations shared. Payne, Paxton, Sternhell \"et al.\" argue that while fascist economies share some similarities, there is no distinctive form of fascist economic organization. Gerald Feldman and Timothy Mason argue that fascism is distinguished by an absence of coherent economic ideology and a lack of serious economic thinking. They state that the decisions taken by fascist leaders cannot be explained within a logical economic framework.\nFascists presented their views as an alternative to both international socialism and free-market economics. While fascism opposed mainstream socialism, fascists sometimes regarded their movement as a type of nationalist \"socialism\" to highlight their commitment to nationalism, describing it as national solidarity and unity. Fascism had a complex relationship with capitalism, both supporting and opposing different aspects of it at different times and in different countries. In general, fascists held an instrumental view of capitalism, regarding it as a tool that may be useful or not, depending on circumstances. Fascist governments typically established close connections between big business and the state, and business was expected to serve the interests of the government. Economic self-sufficiency, known as autarky, was a major goal of most fascist governments.\nFascist governments advocated for the resolution of domestic class conflict within a nation in order to guarantee national unity. This would be done through the state's mediating relations between the classes (contrary to the views of classical liberal-inspired capitalists). While fascism was opposed to domestic class conflict, it held that bourgeois-proletarian conflict existed primarily in international conflict between proletarian nations and bourgeois nations. Fascism condemned what it viewed as widespread character traits that it associated with the typical bourgeois mentality that it opposed, such as materialism, crassness, cowardice, and the inability to comprehend the heroic ideal of the fascist \"warrior\"; and associations with liberalism, individualism, and parliamentarianism. In 1918, Mussolini defined what he viewed as the proletarian character, defining proletarian as being one and the same with producers, a productivist perspective that associated all people deemed productive, including entrepreneurs, technicians, workers and soldiers as being proletarian.\nBecause productivism was key to creating a strong nationalist state, it criticized internationalist and Marxist socialism, advocating instead to represent a type of nationalist productivist socialism. Nevertheless, while condemning parasitical capitalism, it was willing to accommodate productivist capitalism within it so long as it supported the nationalist objective. The role of productivism was derived from Henri de Saint Simon, whose ideas inspired the creation of utopian socialism and influenced other ideologies that stressed solidarity rather than class war and whose conception of productive people in the economy included both productive workers and productive bosses to challenge the influence of the aristocracy and unproductive financial speculators. Saint Simon's vision combined the traditionalist right-wing criticisms of the French Revolution with a left-wing belief in the need for association or collaboration of productive people in society. Whereas Marxism condemned capitalism as a system of exploitative property relations, fascism saw the nature of the control of credit and money in the contemporary capitalist system as abusive.\nUnlike Marxism, fascism did not see class conflict between the Marxist-defined proletariat and the bourgeoisie as a given or as an engine of historical materialism. Instead, it viewed workers and productive capitalists in common as productive people who were in conflict with parasitic elements in society, including corrupt political parties, corrupt financial capital, and feeble people. Fascist leaders such as Mussolini and Hitler spoke of the need to create a new managerial elite led by engineers and captains of industry\u2014but free from the parasitic leadership of industries. Hitler stated that the Nazi Party supported (\"productive capitalism\") that was based upon profit earned from one's own labour, but condemned unproductive capitalism or loan capitalism, which derived profit from speculation.\nFascist economics supported a state-controlled economy that accepted a mix of private and public ownership over the means of production. Economic planning was applied to both the public and private sectors, and the prosperity of private enterprise depended on its acceptance of synchronizing itself with the economic goals of the state. Fascist economic ideology supported the profit motive but emphasized that industries must uphold the national interest as superior to private profit.\nWhile fascism accepted the importance of material wealth and power, it condemned materialism, which was identified as being present in both communism and capitalism, and criticized materialism for lacking acknowledgment of the role of the spirit. In particular, fascists criticized capitalism, not because of its competitive nature nor support of private property, which fascists supported\u2014but due to its materialism, individualism, alleged bourgeois decadence and alleged indifference to the nation. Fascism denounced Marxism for its advocacy of materialist internationalist class identity, which fascists regarded as an attack upon the emotional and spiritual bonds of the nation and a threat to the achievement of genuine national solidarity.\nIn discussing the spread of fascism beyond Italy, historian Philip Morgan states: Since the Depression was a crisis of laissez-faire capitalism and its political counterpart, parliamentary democracy, fascism could pose as the 'third-way' alternative between capitalism and Bolshevism, the model of a new European 'civilization.' As Mussolini typically put it in early 1934, 'from 1929 ... fascism has become a universal phenomenon ... The dominant forces of the 19th century, democracy, socialism, [and] liberalism have been exhausted ... the new political and economic forms of the twentieth-century are fascist'.\nFascists criticized egalitarianism as preserving the weak and instead promoted social Darwinist views and policies. They were in principle opposed to the idea of social welfare, arguing that it \"encouraged the preservation of the degenerate and the feeble.\" The Nazi Party condemned the welfare system of the Weimar Republic, as well as private charity and philanthropy, for supporting people whom they regarded as racially inferior and weak and who should have been weeded out in the process of natural selection. Nevertheless, faced with the mass unemployment and poverty of the Great Depression, the Nazis found it necessary to set up charitable institutions to help racially pure Germans in order to maintain popular support while arguing that this represented \"racial self-help\" and not indiscriminate charity or universal social welfare. Thus, Nazi programs such as the Winter Relief of the German People and the broader National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV) were organized as quasi-private institutions, officially relying on private donations from Germans to help others of their race\u2014although in practice those who refused to donate could face severe consequences. Unlike the social welfare institutions of the Weimar Republic and the Christian charities, the NSV distributed assistance on explicitly racial grounds. It provided support only to those who were \"racially sound, capable of and willing to work, politically reliable, and willing and able to reproduce.\" Non-Aryans were excluded, as well as the \"work-shy\", \"asocials\" and the \"hereditarily ill\". Under these conditions, by 1939, over 17 million Germans had obtained assistance from the NSV, and the agency \"projected a powerful image of caring and support\" for \"those who were judged to have got into difficulties through no fault of their own.\" Yet the organization was \"feared and disliked among society's poorest\" because it resorted to intrusive questioning and monitoring to judge who was worthy of support.\nDirect action.\nFascism emphasizes direct action, including supporting the legitimacy of political violence, as a core part of its politics. Fascism views violent action as a necessity in politics that fascism identifies as being an \"endless struggle\"; this emphasis on the use of political violence means that most fascist parties have also created their own private militias (e.g. the Nazi Party's Brown shirts and Fascist Italy's Blackshirts). The basis of fascism's support of violent action in politics is connected to social Darwinism. Fascist movements have commonly held social Darwinist views of nations, races, and societies. They say that nations and races must purge themselves of socially and biologically weak or degenerate people while simultaneously promoting the creation of strong people in order to survive in a world defined by perpetual national and racial conflict.\nAge and gender roles.\nFascism emphasizes youth both in a physical sense of age and a spiritual sense as related to virility and commitment to action. The Italian Fascists' political anthem was called \"Giovinezza\" (\"The Youth\"). Fascism identifies the physical age period of youth as a critical time for the moral development of people who will affect society. Walter Laqueur argues that \"[t]he corollaries of the cult of war and physical danger were the cult of brutality, strength, and sexuality ... [fascism is] a true counter-civilization: rejecting the sophisticated rationalist humanism of Old Europe, fascism sets up as its ideal the primitive instincts and primal emotions of the barbarian.\"\nItalian fascism pursued what it called \"moral hygiene\" of youth, particularly regarding sexuality. Fascist Italy promoted what it considered normal sexual behaviour in youth while denouncing what it considered deviant sexual behaviour. It condemned pornography, most forms of birth control and contraceptive devices (with the exception of the condom), homosexuality and prostitution as deviant sexual behaviour. However, enforcement of laws opposed to such practices was erratic, and authorities often looked the other way. Fascist Italy regarded the promotion of male sexual excitation before puberty as the cause of criminality amongst male youth, declared homosexuality a social disease and pursued an aggressive campaign to reduce prostitution of young women.\nMussolini perceived women's primary role as primarily child bearers, while that of men as warriors, once saying: \"War is to man what maternity is to the woman.\" In an effort to increase birth rates, the Italian Fascist government gave financial incentives to women who raised large families and initiated policies intended to reduce the number of women employed. Italian Fascism called for women to be honoured as \"reproducers of the nation\", and the Italian Fascist government held ritual ceremonies to celebrate women's role within the Italian nation. In 1934, Mussolini declared that employment of women was a \"major aspect of the thorny problem of unemployment\" and that for women, working was \"incompatible with childbearing\"; Mussolini went on to say that the solution to unemployment for men was the \"exodus of women from the work force.\"\nThe German Nazi government strongly encouraged women to stay at home to bear children and keep house. This policy was reinforced by bestowing the Cross of Honor of the German Mother on women bearing four or more children. The unemployment rate was cut substantially, mostly through arms production and sending women home so that men could take their jobs. Nazi propaganda sometimes promoted premarital and extramarital sexual relations, unwed motherhood and divorce, but at other times the Nazis opposed such behaviour.\nThe Nazis decriminalized abortion in cases where fetuses had hereditary defects or were of a race the government disapproved of, while the abortion of healthy pure German, Aryan fetuses remained strictly forbidden. For non-Aryans, abortion was often compulsory. Their eugenics program also stemmed from the \"progressive biomedical model\" of Weimar Germany. In 1935, Nazi Germany expanded the legality of abortion by amending its eugenics law to promote abortion for women with hereditary disorders. The law allowed abortion if a woman gave her permission and the fetus was not yet viable and for purposes of so-called racial hygiene.\nThe Nazis said that homosexuality was degenerate, effeminate, perverted, and undermined masculinity because it did not produce children. They considered homosexuality curable through therapy, citing modern scientism and the study of sexology. Open homosexuals were interned in Nazi concentration camps.\nPalingenesis and modernism.\nFascism emphasizes both palingenesis (national rebirth or re-creation) and modernism. In particular, fascism's nationalism has been identified as having a palingenetic character. Fascism promotes the nation's regeneration and purging it of decadence. Fascism accepts forms of modernism that it deems promote national regeneration while rejecting forms of modernism regarded as antithetical to national regeneration. Fascism aestheticized modern technology and its association with speed, power, and violence. Fascism admired advances in the economy in the early 20th century, particularly Fordism and scientific management. Fascist modernism has been recognized as inspired or developed by various figures\u2014such as Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Ernst J\u00fcnger, Gottfried Benn, Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line, Knut Hamsun, Ezra Pound and Wyndham Lewis.\nIn Italy, such modernist influence was exemplified by Marinetti, who advocated a palingenetic modernist society that condemned liberal-bourgeois values of tradition and psychology while promoting a technological-martial religion of national renewal that emphasized militant nationalism. In Germany, it was exemplified by J\u00fcnger who was influenced by his observation of the technological warfare during World War I and claimed that a new social class had been created that he described as the \"warrior-worker\"; Like Marinetti, J\u00fcnger emphasized the revolutionary capacities of technology. He emphasized an \"organic construction\" between humans and machines as a liberating and regenerative force that challenged liberal democracy, conceptions of individual autonomy, bourgeois nihilism, and decadence. He conceived of a society based on a totalitarian concept of \"total mobilization\" of such disciplined warrior-workers.\nCulture.\nAesthetics.\nIn \"The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction\" (1935), Walter Benjamin identifies aestheticization of politics as a key ingredient in fascist regimes. On this point he quotes Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, founder of the Futurist art movement and co-author of the Fascist Manifesto (1919), who aestheticizes war in his writings and claims that \"war is beautiful.\"\nIn \"Simulacra and Simulation\" (1981), Jean Baudrillard interprets fascism as a \"political aesthetic of death\" and a vehement countermovement against the increasing rationalism, secularism, and pacifism of the modern Western world.\nThe standard definition of fascism, given by Stanley G. Payne, focuses on three concepts, one of which is a \"fascist style\" with an aesthetic structure of meetings, symbols, and political liturgy, stressing emotional and mystical aspects.\nEmilio Gentile argues that fascism expresses itself aesthetically more than theoretically by means of a new political style with myths, rites, and symbols as a lay religion designed to acculturate, socialize, and integrate the faith of the masses with the goal of creating a \"new man\".\nCultural critic Susan Sontag writes:\nSontag also enumerates some commonalities between fascist art and the official art of communist countries, such as the obeisance of the masses to the hero, and a preference for the monumental and the \"grandiose and rigid\" choreography of mass bodies. But whereas official communist art \"aims to expound and reinforce a utopian morality\", the art of fascist countries such as Nazi Germany \"displays a utopian aesthetics \u2013 that of physical perfection\", in a way that is \"both prurient and idealizing\".\nAccording to Sontag, fascist aesthetics \"is based on the containment of vital forces; movements are confined, held tight, held in.\" Its appeal is not necessarily limited to those who share the fascist political ideology because fascism \"stands for an ideal or rather ideals that are persistent today under the other banners: the ideal of life as art, the cult of beauty, the fetishism of courage, the dissolution of alienation in ecstatic feelings of community; the repudiation of the intellect; the family of man (under the parenthood of leaders).\"\nPopular culture.\nIn Italy, the Mussolini regime created the to encourage film studios to glorify fascism. Italian cinema flourished because the regime stopped the import of Hollywood films in 1938, subsidized domestic production, and kept ticket prices low. It encouraged international distribution to glorify its African empire and to belie the charge that Italy was backward. The regime censored criticism and used the state-run Luce Institute film company to laud the Duce through newsreels, documentaries, and photographs. The regime promoted Italian opera and theatre as well, making sure that political enemies did not have a voice on stage.\nIn Nazi Germany the new Reich Chamber of Culture was under the control of Joseph Goebbels, Hitler's powerful Reich Minister for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda. The goal was to stimulate the Aryanization of German culture and to prohibit postmodern trends such as surrealism and cubism.\nCriticism.\nFascist parties were closely contested by anti-fascist movements from the political centre and left wing throughout the Interwar period. The defeat of the Axis powers in World War II and subsequent revelation of the crimes against humanity committed during the Holocaust by Germany have led to an almost universal condemnation of both past and present forms of fascism in the modern era. \"Fascism\" is today used across the political spectrum as a pejorative or byword for perceived authoritarianism and other forms of political evil.\nAnti-democratic and tyrannical.\nOne of the most common and strongest criticisms of fascism is that it is a tyranny. Fascism is deliberately and entirely non-democratic and anti-democratic.\nFascism's extreme authoritarianism and nationalism often manifest as a belief in racial purity or a master race, usually blended with some variant of racism or discrimination against a demonized \"Other\", such as Jews, homosexuals, transgender people, ethnic minorities, or immigrants. These ideas have motivated fascist regimes to commit massacres, forced sterilizations, deportations, and genocides. During World War II, the genocidal and imperialist ambitions of the fascist Axis powers resulted in the murder of millions of people. Federico Finchelstein wrote that fascism \nUnprincipled opportunism.\nSome critics of Italian fascism have said that much of the ideology was merely a by-product of unprincipled opportunism by Mussolini and that he changed his political stances merely to bolster his personal ambitions while he disguised them as being purposeful to the public. Richard Washburn Child, the American ambassador to Italy who worked with Mussolini and became his friend and admirer, defended Mussolini's opportunistic behaviour by writing: Opportunist is a term of reproach used to brand men who fit themselves to conditions for the reasons of self-interest. Mussolini, as I have learned to know him, is an opportunist in the sense that he believed that mankind itself must be fitted to changing conditions rather than to fixed theories, no matter how many hopes and prayers have been expended on theories and programmes. Child quoted Mussolini as saying: \"The sanctity of an ism is not in the ism; it has no sanctity beyond its power to do, to work, to succeed in practice. It may have succeeded yesterday and fail to-morrow. Failed yesterday and succeed to-morrow. The machine, first of all, must run!\"\nSome have criticized Mussolini's actions during the outbreak of World War I as opportunistic for seeming to suddenly abandon Marxist egalitarian internationalism for non-egalitarian nationalism and note, to that effect, that upon Mussolini endorsing Italy's intervention in the war against Germany and Austria-Hungary, he and the new fascist movement received financial support from Italian and foreign sources, such as Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies as well as the British Security Service MI5. Some, including Mussolini's socialist opponents at the time, have noted that regardless of the financial support he accepted for his pro-interventionist stance, Mussolini was free to write whatever he wished in his newspaper without prior sanctioning from his financial backers. Furthermore, the major source of financial support that Mussolini and the fascist movement received in World War I was from France and is widely believed to have been French socialists who supported the French government's war against Germany and who sent support to Italian socialists who wanted Italian intervention on France's side.\nMussolini\u2019s transformation away from Marxism into what eventually became fascism began prior to World War I, as Mussolini had grown increasingly pessimistic about Marxism and egalitarianism while becoming increasingly supportive of figures who opposed egalitarianism, such as Friedrich Nietzsche. By 1902, Mussolini was studying Georges Sorel, Nietzsche and Vilfredo Pareto. Sorel's emphasis on the need for overthrowing decadent liberal democracy and capitalism by the use of violence, direct action, general strikes and neo-Machiavellian appeals to emotion impressed Mussolini deeply. Mussolini's use of Nietzsche made him a highly unorthodox socialist, due to Nietzsche's promotion of elitism and anti-egalitarian views. Prior to World War I, Mussolini's writings over time indicated that he had abandoned the Marxism and egalitarianism that he had previously supported in favour of Nietzsche's concept and anti-egalitarianism. In 1908, Mussolini wrote a short essay called \"Philosophy of Strength\" based on his Nietzschean influence, in which Mussolini openly spoke fondly of the ramifications of an impending war in Europe in challenging both religion and nihilism: \"[A] new kind of free spirit will come, strengthened by the war, ... a spirit equipped with a kind of sublime perversity, ... a new free spirit will triumph over God and over Nothing.\"\nIdeological dishonesty.\nFascism has been criticized for being ideologically dishonest. Major examples of ideological dishonesty have been identified in Italian fascism's changing relationship with German Nazism. Fascist Italy's official foreign policy positions commonly used rhetorical ideological hyperbole to justify its actions, although during Dino Grandi's tenure as Italy's foreign minister the country engaged in free of such fascist hyperbole. Italian fascism's stance towards German Nazism fluctuated from support from the late 1920s to 1934, when it celebrated Hitler's rise to power and Mussolini's first meeting with Hitler in 1934; to opposition from 1934 to 1936 after the assassination of Italy's allied leader in Austria, Engelbert Dollfuss, by Austrian Nazis; and again back to support after 1936, when Germany was the only significant power that did not denounce Italy's invasion and occupation of Ethiopia.\nAfter antagonism exploded between Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy over the assassination of Austrian Chancellor Dollfuss in 1934, Mussolini and Italian fascists denounced and ridiculed Nazism's racial theories, particularly by denouncing its Nordicism, while promoting Mediterraneanism. Mussolini himself responded to Nordicists' claims of Italy being divided into Nordic and Mediterranean racial areas due to Germanic invasions of Northern Italy by claiming that while Germanic tribes such as the Lombards took control of Italy after the fall of Ancient Rome, they arrived in small numbers (about 8,000) and quickly assimilated into Roman culture and spoke the Latin language within fifty years. Italian fascism was influenced by the tradition of Italian nationalists scornfully looking down upon Nordicists' claims and taking pride in comparing the age and sophistication of ancient Roman civilization as well as the classical revival in the Renaissance to that of Nordic societies that Italian nationalists described as \"newcomers\" to civilization in comparison. At the height of antagonism between the Nazis and Italian fascists over race, Mussolini claimed that the Germans themselves were not a pure race and noted with irony that the Nazi theory of German racial superiority was based on the theories of non-German foreigners, such as Frenchman Arthur de Gobineau. After the tension in German-Italian relations diminished during the late 1930s, Italian fascism sought to harmonize its ideology with German Nazism and combined Nordicist and Mediterranean racial theories, noting that Italians were members of the Aryan Race, composed of a mixed Nordic-Mediterranean subtype.\nIn 1938, Mussolini declared upon Italy's adoption of antisemitic laws that Italian fascism had always been antisemitic. However, Italian fascism did not endorse antisemitism until the late 1930s when Mussolini feared alienating antisemitic Nazi Germany, whose power and influence were growing in Europe. Prior to that period, there had been notable Jewish Italians who had been senior Italian fascist officials, including Margherita Sarfatti, who had also been Mussolini's mistress. Also contrary to Mussolini's claim in 1938, only a small number of Italian fascists were staunchly antisemitic (such as Roberto Farinacci and Giuseppe Preziosi), while others such as Italo Balbo, who came from Ferrara which had one of Italy's largest Jewish communities, were disgusted by the antisemitic laws and opposed them. Fascism scholar Mark Neocleous notes that while Italian fascism did not have a clear commitment to antisemitism, there were occasional antisemitic statements issued prior to 1938, such as Mussolini in 1919 declaring that the Jewish bankers in London and New York were connected by race to the Russian Bolsheviks and that eight percent of the Russian Bolsheviks were Jews.\nAnti-fascism.\nAnti-fascism is a political movement in opposition to fascist ideologies, groups and individuals. Beginning in European countries in the 1920s, it was at its most significant shortly before and during World War II, where the Axis powers were opposed by many countries forming the Allies of World War II and dozens of resistance movements worldwide. Anti-fascism has been an element of movements across the political spectrum and holding many different political positions such as anarchism, communism, pacifism, republicanism, social democracy, socialism and syndicalism as well as centrist, conservative, liberal and nationalist viewpoints.\nOrganization against fascism began around 1920. Fascism became the state ideology of Italy in 1922 and of Germany in 1933, spurring a large increase in anti-fascist action, including German resistance to Nazism and the Italian resistance movement. Anti-fascism was a major aspect of the Spanish Civil War, which foreshadowed World War II.\nBefore World War II, the West had not taken seriously the threat of fascism, and anti-fascism was sometimes associated with communism. However, the outbreak of World War II greatly changed Western perceptions, and fascism was seen as an existential threat by not only the communist Soviet Union but also by the liberal-democratic United States and United Kingdom. The Axis Powers of World War II were generally fascist, and the fight against them was characterized in anti-fascist terms. Resistance during World War II to fascism occurred in every occupied country, and came from across the ideological spectrum. The defeat of the Axis powers generally ended fascism as a state ideology.\nAfter World War II, the anti-fascist movement continued to be active in places where organized fascism continued or re-emerged. There was a resurgence of antifa in Germany in the 1980s, as a response to the invasion of the punk scene by neo-Nazis. This influenced the antifa movement in the United States in the late 1980s and 1990s, which was similarly carried by punks. In the 21st century, this greatly increased in prominence as a response to the resurgence of the radical right, especially after the election of Donald Trump."}
{"id": "11057", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11057", "title": "Forge", "text": "A forge is a type of hearth used for heating metals, or the workplace (smithy) where such a hearth is located. The forge is used by the smith to heat a piece of metal to a temperature at which it becomes easier to shape by forging, or to the point at which work hardening no longer occurs. The metal (known as the \"workpiece\") is transported to and from the forge using tongs, which are also used to hold the workpiece on the smithy's anvil while the smith works it with a hammer. Sometimes, such as when hardening steel or cooling the work so that it may be handled with bare hands, the workpiece is transported to the slack tub, which rapidly cools the workpiece in a large body of water. However, depending on the metal type, it may require an oil quench or a salt brine instead; many metals require more than plain water hardening. The slack tub also provides water to control the fire in the forge.\nTypes.\nCoal/coke/charcoal forge.\nA forge typically uses bituminous coal, industrial coke or charcoal as the fuel to heat metal. The designs of these forges have varied over time, but whether the fuel is coal, coke or charcoal the basic design has remained the same.\nA forge of this type is essentially a hearth or fireplace designed to allow a fire to be controlled such that metal introduced to the fire may be brought to a malleable state or to bring about other metallurgical effects (hardening, annealing, and tempering as examples). The forge fire in this type of forge is controlled in three ways: amount of air, the volume of fuel, and shape of the fuel/fire.\nOver thousands of years of forging, these devices have evolved in one form or another as the essential features of this type of forge:\nDuring operation, fuel is placed in or on the hearth and ignited. A source of moving air, such as a fan or bellows, introduces additional air into the fire through the tuyere. With additional air, the fire consumes fuel faster and burns hotter (and cleaner - smoke can be thought of as escaped potential fuel).\nA blacksmith balances the fuel and air in the fire to suit particular kinds of work. Often this involves adjusting and maintaining the shape of the fire.\nIn a typical coal forge, a firepot will be centred in a flat hearth. The tuyere will enter the firepot at the bottom. In operation, the hot core of the fire will be a ball of burning coke in and above the firepot. The heart of the fire will be surrounded by a layer of hot but not burning coke. Around the unburnt coke will be a transitional layer of coal being transformed into coke by the heat of the fire. Surrounding all is a ring or horseshoe-shaped layer of raw coal, usually kept damp and tightly packed to maintain the shape of the fire's heart and to keep the coal from burning directly so that it \"cooks\" into coke first.\nIf a larger fire is necessary, the smith increases the air flowing into the fire as well as feeding and deepening the coke heart. The smith can also adjust the length and width of the fire in such a forge to accommodate different shapes of work.\nThe major variation from the forge and fire just described is a 'backdraft' where there is no fire pot, and the tuyere enters the hearth horizontally from the back wall.\nCoke and charcoal may be burned in the same forges that use coal, but since there is no need to convert the raw fuel at the heart of the fire (as with coal), the fire is handled differently.\nIndividual smiths and specialized applications have fostered the development of a variety of forges of this type, from the coal forge described above to simpler constructions amounting to a hole in the ground with a pipe leading into it.\nGas forge.\nA gas forge typically uses propane or natural gas as the fuel. One common, efficient design uses a cylindrical forge chamber and a burner tube mounted at a right angle to the body. The chamber is typically lined with refractory materials such as a hard castable refractory ceramic or a soft ceramic thermal blanket (ex: Kaowool). The burner mixes fuel and air which are ignited at the tip, which protrudes a short way into the chamber lining. The air pressure, and therefore heat, can be increased with a mechanical blower or by taking advantage of the Venturi effect.\nGas forges vary in size and construction, from large forges using a big burner with a blower or several atmospheric burners to forges built out of a coffee can utilizing a cheap, simple propane torch. A small forge can even be carved out of a single soft firebrick.\nThe primary advantage of a gas forge is the ease of use, particularly for a novice. A gas forge is simple to operate compared to coal forges, and the fire produced is clean and consistent. They are less versatile, as the fire cannot be reshaped to accommodate large or unusually shaped pieces. It is also difficult to heat a small section of a piece. A common misconception is that gas forges cannot produce enough heat to enable forge-welding, but a well-designed gas forge is hot enough for any task.\nFinery forge.\nA finery forge is a water-powered mill where pig iron is refined into wrought iron.\nForging equipment.\nAnvil.\nThe anvil serves as a workbench to the blacksmith, where the metal to be forged is worked. Anvils may seem clunky and heavy, but they are a highly refined tool carefully shaped to suit a blacksmith's needs. Anvils are made of cast or wrought iron with a tool steel face welded on or of a single piece of cast or forged tool steel. Some anvils are made of only cast iron and have no tool steel face. These are not real anvils, and will not serve a blacksmith as such because they are too soft. A common term for a cast iron anvil is \"ASO\" or \"Anvil Shaped Object\". The purpose of a tool steel face on an anvil is to provide what some call \"rebound\" as well as being hard and not denting easily from misplaced hammer blows. The term rebound means it projects some of the force of the blacksmith's hammer blows back into the metal thus moving more metal at once than if there were no rebound. A good anvil can project anywhere from 50 to 99% of the energy back into the workpiece. The flat top, called the \"face\" is highly polished and usually has two holes (but can have more or less depending on the design). The square hole is called the hardy hole, where the square shank of the hardy tool fits. There are many different kinds of hardy tools. The smaller hole is called the pritchel hole, used as a bolster when punching holes in hot metal, or to hold tools similar to how the hardy tool does, but for tools that require being able to turn a 360-degree angle such as a hold-down tool for when the blacksmith's tongs cannot hold a workpiece as securely as it needs to be. On the front of the anvil, there is sometimes a \"horn\" that is used for bending, drawing out steel, and many other tasks. Between the horn and the anvil face, there is often a small area called a \"step\" or a \"cutting table\" That is used for cutting hot or cold steel with chisels, and hot cut tools without harming the anvil's face. Marks on the face transfer into imperfections in the blacksmith's work.\nHammer.\nThere are many types of hammer used in a blacksmith's workshop but this will name just a few common ones. Hammers can range in shape and weight from half an ounce to nearly 30 pounds depending on the type of work being done with it.\nChisel.\nChisels are made of high carbon steel. They are hardened and tempered at the cutting edge while the head is left soft so it will not crack when hammered. Chisels are of two types, hot and cold chisels. The cold chisel is used for cutting cold metals while the hot chisel is for hot metals. Usually, hot chisels are thinner and therefore can not be substituted with cold chisels. Also, many smiths shape chisels as to have a simple twisted handle as to resemble a hammer, they can be used at a greater distance away from the hot metals. They are very useful and found throughout the world.\nTongs.\nTongs are used by the blacksmith for holding hot metals securely. The mouths are custom made by the smith in various shapes to suit the gripping of various shapes of metal. It is not uncommon for a blacksmith to own twenty or more pairs of tongs; traditionally, a smith would start building their collection during the apprenticeship.\nThere are various types of tongs available in the market.\n(1) flat tong\n(2) rivet or ring tong\n(3) straight lip fluted tong\n(4) gad tong\nFuller.\nFullers are forming tools of different shapes used in making grooves or hollows. They are often used in pairs, the bottom fuller has a square shank which fits into the hardy hole in the anvil while the top fuller has a handle. The work is placed on the bottom fuller and the top is placed on the work and struck with a hammer. The top fuller is also used for finishing round corners and for stretching or spreading metal.\nHardy.\nThe hardy tool is a tool with a square shank that fits in a hardy hole. There are many different kinds of hardy tools such as the hot cut hardy, used for cutting hot metal on the anvil; the fuller tool, used for drawing out metal and making grooves; bending jigs - and too many others to list.\nSlack tub.\nA \"slack tub\" is usually a large container full of water used by a blacksmith to quench hot metal. The slack tub is principally used to cool parts of the work during forging (to protect them, or keep the metal in one area from \"spreading\" for example, nearby hammer blows); to harden the steel; to tend a coal or charcoal forge; and simply to cool the work quickly for easy inspection. In bladesmithing and tool-making the term will usually be changed to a \"quench tank\" because oil or brine is used to cool the metal. The term slack is believed to derive from the word \"slake\", as in slaking the heat.\nTypes of forging.\nDrop forging.\nDrop forging is a process used to shape metal into complex shapes by dropping a heavy hammer with a die on its face onto the workpiece.\nProcess.\nThe workpiece is placed into the forge. Then the impact of a hammer causes the heated material, which is very malleable, to conform to the shape of the die and die cavities. Typically only one die is needed to completely form the part. Extra space between the die faces causes some of the material to be pressed out of the sides, forming flash. This acts as a relief valve for the extreme pressure produced by the closing of the die halves and is later trimmed off of the finished part.\nEquipment.\nThe equipment used in the drop forming process is commonly known as a power or drop hammer. These may be powered by air, hydraulics, or mechanics. Depending on how the machine is powered, the mass of the ram, and the drop height, the striking force can be anywhere from 11,000 to 425,000 pounds.\nThe tools that are used, dies and punches, come in many different shapes and sizes, as well as materials. Examples of these shapes are flat and v-shaped which are used for open-die forging, and single or multiple-impression dies used for closed die forging. The designs for the dies have many aspects to them that must be considered. They all must be properly aligned, they must be designed so the metal and the flash will flow properly and fill all the grooves, and special considerations must be made for supporting webs and ribs and the parting line location. The materials must also be selected carefully. Some factors that go into the material selection are cost, their ability to harden, their ability to withstand high pressures, hot abrasion, heat cracking, and other such things. The most common materials used for the tools are carbon steel and, in some cases, nickel-based alloys.\nWorkpiece materials.\nThe materials that are used most commonly in drop forging are aluminium, copper, nickel, mild steel, stainless steel, and magnesium. Mild steel is the best choice, and magnesium generally performs poorly as a drop forging material.\nMythology.\nVarious gods and goddesses are associated with the forge in a number of mythologies, such as the Irish Brigid, West African Ogun, Greek Hephaestus and Roman Vulcan."}
{"id": "11059", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11059", "title": "Five Pillars of Islam", "text": "The Five Pillars of Islam (' ; also ' \"pillars of the religion\") are fundamental practices in Islam, considered to be obligatory acts of worship for all Muslims. They are summarized in the hadith of Gabriel. The Sunni and Shia agree on the basic details of the performance and practice of these acts, but the Shia do not refer to them by the same name (see Ancillaries of the Faith, for the Twelvers, and Seven pillars of Ismailism). They are: Muslim creed, prayer, charity to the poor, fasting in the month of Ramadan, and the pilgrimage to Mecca for those who are able.\nTranslation of Rukn.\nThe word \"rukn\" in Arabic refers to the corner of a building and the pillars are called \"umud\". It is also used to refer to the basic elements or first principles of something. The \"arkan\" in military terms refers to the general staff. Thus, the translation \"five principles of Islam\" is more accurate than \"five pillars of Islam.\"\nOverview of the Five Pillars of Islam.\nThe ritual obligations of Muslims are called the Five Pillars. They are acknowledged and practiced by Muslims throughout the world, notwithstanding their disparities. They are viewed as compulsory for individuals who genuinely wish to pursue a life like that which Islamic prophet Muhammad led. Like other religions, Islam holds certain practices to be standard; however, that does not imply that all individuals who regard themselves as Muslims necessarily observe them. Individual participation can vary depending on the individual's faith; for example, not every individual prays every day, keeps the fast, performs the Hajj, or donates extensively to charity. There are also Muslim communities such as Alevis who reject the Five Pillars but follows Four Doors system.\nShortly after the Muslim Arabs conquered new terrains, they started raising mosques and castles and commissioning different commemorations and artifacts\u00a0as articulations of their faith and culture. The religious practice of Islam, which signifies \"submission to God\", depends on fundamentals that are known as the Five Pillars. Each of the five pillars is alluded to in the Quran, though in various chapters (\"suwar\"). Further insights concerning these commitments are given in the Hadith.\nThough comparable practices were performed in pre-Islamic Arabia and by Jews and Christians at the time of Muhammad, they were changed in the Quran and Hadith, given a carefully monotheistic center, and identified with the life of Muhammad. In the Quran, in spite of the fact that the Shahada does not show up in full, Quran urges the individuals who accept to obey God and his Messenger. Prayer is alluded to multiple times, with prayer times referenced in Quran , and the demonstrations of bowing and prostrating in 48.29. In a few chapters, Muslims are urged both to pray and give alms (for example Q.), however what, when and to whom gifts ought to be made is clarified in more detail in the hadith. There is a critical entry on fasting in the Quran (), which alludes to the period of Ramadan and sets out the detail on who ought, and ought not fast, to a certain extent under specific conditions. Regarding the matter of the Hajj, the longest Quranic section () recommends the destination location of the pilgrimage, the lead and exercises of the individuals who participate, urging them to have God as a top priority consistently.\nPillars of Sunni Islam.\nFirst pillar: Shahada (Declaration of Faith).\nThe first pillar of Islam is the \"Shahada\", the assertion of faith. There are two shahadas: \"There is no god but God\" and \"Muhammad is the messenger of God\". This set statement is normally recited in Arabic: \"l\u0101 \u02beil\u0101ha \u02beill\u0101-ll\u0101hu mu\u1e25ammadun ras\u016blu-ll\u0101h\" () \"There is no god but God (and) Muhammad is the messenger of God.\" It is essential to utter it to become a Muslim and to convert to Islam.\nThe first shahada promotes the essential unity of the faith, proclaiming that there is no god but God. The Tawhid, which is the prayer that states \"no god but God\" is a major component of the Islamic faith, for it asserts the monotheistic aspect of Islam, promoting unity of God as the source of existence. The second shahada demonstrates God's essential mercy. This prayer proclaims Muhammad as the last prophet, and it uses Muhammad as the prime example of guidance for all Muslims. Muhammad received revelation that was distorted by earlier communities, such as Jewish and Christian societies; Muhammad was the recipient of the Quran's guidance himself and now is bearer of this guidance for the rest of the Muslim community throughout history.\nThe Shahada, or profession of faith is said five times a day during prayer. It is the first thing said to a newborn, and the last thing to a person on their death-bed, showing how the Muslim prayer and the pillars are instrumental from the day a person is born until the day they die.\nSecond Pillar: Salah (Prayer).\nThe Second Pillar of Sunni Islam is Salah, or prayer. Before a prayer is observed, ablutions are performed including washing one's hands, face and feet. A caller (Muezzin in Arabic) chants aloud from a raised place in the mosque. Verses from the Quran are recited either loudly or silently. These prayers are a very specific type of prayer and a very physical type of prayer called prostrations. These prayers are done five times a day, at set strict times, with the individual facing Mecca. The prayers are performed at dawn, noon, afternoon, evening, and night: the names are according to the prayer times: \"Fajr\" (dawn), \"Dhuhr\" (noon), \"\u02bfA\u1e63r\" (afternoon), \"Maghrib\" (evening), and \"\u02bfIsh\u0101\u02be\" (night). The Fajr prayer is performed before sunrise, Dhuhr is performed in the midday after the sun has surpassed its highest point, Asr is the evening prayer before sunset, Maghrib is the evening prayer after sunset and Isha is the night prayer. All of these prayers are recited while facing in the direction of the Kaaba in Mecca and form an important aspect of the Muslim Ummah. Muslims must wash before prayer; this washing is called \"wudu\" (\"purification\"). The prayer is accompanied by a series of set positions including; bowing with hands on knees, standing, prostrating and sitting in a special position (not on the heels, nor on the buttocks). At every change in position, \"God is great\" is said and it is a fixed tradition that has to be recited in each posture. A Muslim may perform their prayer anywhere, such as in offices, universities, and fields. However, the mosque is the preferable place for prayers because the mosque allows for fellowship. These prayers may also be observed individually if one is not able to go. The prayers are not required for women during their periods, prepubescent children and those with intellectual and physical disabilities inhibiting prayer. Those who are sick and unable to assume the positions of prayer are still required to pray, although they may pray in bed and even lying down. When traveling, one may observe the afternoon prayers following one another: also the sunset and late evening prayers can be combined too.\nThird Pillar: Zakat (Almsgiving).\nThe Third Pillar of Islam is Zak\u0101t, or alms giving or charity. Zakat means purification which indicates that a payment makes the rest of one's wealth legally and religiously pure. By following this pillar, Muslims have to deduct certain amount of their wealth to support the Islamic community \u2014 usually about 2.5% of their wealth. This practice is not found in the Quran but rather in the hadith. The tax is used to take good care of the holy places and mosques in the individual's specific Muslim community or to give assistance to those in need or who are impoverished. The word zak\u0101t can be defined as purification and growth because it allows an individual to achieve balance and encourages new growth. The principle of knowing that all things belong to God is essential to purification and growth. Zak\u0101t is obligatory for all Muslims who are able to do so. It is the personal responsibility of each Muslim to ease the economic hardship of others and to strive towards eliminating inequality. Zak\u0101t consists of spending a portion of one's wealth for the benefit of the poor or needy, such as debtors or travelers. A Muslim may also donate more as an act of voluntary charity (\"sadaqah\"), rather than to achieve additional divine reward. Also, Muslims are required to give back to the poor, specifically through financial support, on the streets in addition to the Zak\u0101t. Zak\u0101t shows how the Islam faith impacts the financial situation of a believer, drawing into all aspects of life.\nThere are five principles that should be followed when giving the zak\u0101t:\nFourth Pillar: Sawm (Fasting).\nThe Fourth Pillar of Islam is Sawm, or fasting. Fasting takes place during the daylight hours in Ramadan, which is the holy month in the Islamic calendar. Using a lunar calendar means the month of Ramadan shifts 11 days earlier each year. Sawm is directly mentioned in the Quran: \"eat and drink until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the blackness of the night at dawn, then complete the fast till night\u2026\". The fast occurs from dawn to sunset each day, during which time believers are expected to prohibit themselves from any food, drink, sexual intercourse, or smoking. However, after sunset and before dawn, individuals can participate in any of the actions previously stated as they desire. The reason for fasting during Ramadan is to remind Muslims that all individuals are similarly needy upon the assistance of God and that there are less lucky individuals who need their assistance. Ramadan is a period of reflection when Muslims are called upon to recharge their faith, increment their charity, and make apology. In the Quran, the month of Ramadan was first revealed to Muhammad. Ramadan fasting ends with the \"Id-ul-Fitr\" (Festival of the Breaking of the Fast), which lasts for three days; of the first day of this festival, there is a meeting at the mosque for prayer celebration and each family head gives money for alms. Three types of fasting (\"Siyam\") are recognized by the Quran: ritual fasting, fasting as compensation for repentance (both from Quran 2), and ascetic fasting (from )\nRitual fasting is an obligatory act during the month of Ramadan. Muslims must abstain from food and drink from dawn to dusk during this month, and are to be especially mindful of other sins. Fasting is necessary for every Muslim that has reached puberty (unless they suffer from a medical condition which prevents them from doing so).\nThe fast is meant to allow Muslims to seek nearness and to look for forgiveness from God, to express their gratitude to and dependence on him, atone for their past sins, and to remind them of the needy. During Ramadan, Muslims are also expected to put more effort into following the teachings of Islam by refraining from violence, anger, envy, greed, lust, profane language, gossip and to try to get along with fellow Muslims better. In addition, all obscene and irreligious sights and sounds are to be avoided.\nFasting during Ramadan is obligatory, but exceptions are made for several groups for whom it would be very dangerous and excessively problematic. These include pre-pubescent children, those with a medical condition such as diabetes, elderly people, and pregnant or breastfeeding women. Observing fasts is not permitted for menstruating women. Other individuals for whom it is considered acceptable not to fast are those who are ill or traveling. Missed fasts usually must be made up for soon afterward, although the exact requirements vary according to circumstance.\nFifth Pillar: Hajj (Pilgrimage).\nThe final Pillar of Islam is the Hajj, or pilgrimage. During one's life, a Muslim is required to make the pilgrimage to Mecca during the 12th month of the lunar calendar. This ritual consists of making journey to Mecca wearing only 2 white sheets so all of the pilgrims are identical and there is no class distinction among them. Amid the hajj, every single Muslim man dresses alike in a straightforward fabric, again to emphasize their uniformity. Ladies wear a less complex type of their ordinary dress. Pilgrims put the white sheets on when they enter the sanctuary area of Mecca and enter a state of \"ihram\" or purity. After a Muslim makes the trip to Mecca, they are known as a hajj/hajja (one who made the pilgrimage to Mecca). The main rituals of the Hajj include walking seven times around the Kaaba termed \"Tawaf\", touching the Black Stone termed Istilam, traveling seven times between Mount Safa and Mount Marwah termed \"Sa'yee\", and symbolically stoning the Devil in Mina termed Ramee. When at Mecca, the pilgrims go to the Ka\u2019aba in the mosque and walk around it in a circle. They then pray together in official ceremonies, and then they go out to perform the \"standing ceremony\" to remember the Farewell Sermon of Muhammad on the Arafat. On the return trip, pilgrims stop in Mina, where they throw 7 stones at stone pillars that represent Satan as to express their hatred for Shaitan (Satan). They then return to Mecca for final ceremonies by circumambulating the Ka\u2019aba seven times and then leave Mecca to journey back home. Inability to make the Hajj, whether because of physical strength, economic conditions, or other reasons, excuses the duty of Hajj. The Quran specifically says that only those capable of making the pilgrimage are required to do so. The reason for this journey is to follow in the footsteps of Muhammad, hoping to gain enlightenment as Muhammad did when he was in the presence of God. The pilgrimage of the Hajj is in the Quran.\nThe pilgrim, or the \"haji\", is honoured in the Muslim community. Islamic teachers say that the Hajj should be an expression of devotion to God, not a means to gain social standing. The believer should be self-aware and examine their intentions in performing the pilgrimage. This should lead to constant striving for self-improvement. A pilgrimage made at any time other than the Hajj season is called an \"Umrah\", and while not mandatory is strongly recommended.\nPillars of Shia Islam.\nTwelvers.\nTwelver Shia Islam has five Usul al-Din and ten Furu al-Din, i.e., the Shia Islamic beliefs and practices. The Twelver Shia Islam Usul al-Din, equivalent to a Shia Five Pillars, are all beliefs considered foundational to Islam, and thus classified a bit differently from those listed above. They are:\nIn addition to these five pillars, there are ten practices that Shia Muslims must perform, called the \"Ancillaries of the Faith\" (Arabic: fur\u016b\u02bf al-d\u012bn).\nIsmailis.\nIsma'ilis have their own pillars, which are as follows:\nHistory of the Pillars.\nOne of the greatest assumptions about Islamic history is that the Five Pillars were already set and in place at the time of Muhammad's death in 632 CE. However, most changes to these Islamic rituals came from small differences among minority Muslim groups. The major beliefs of the Pillars were already in place, taking the shape of the life and beliefs of Muhammad. The Five Pillars are alluded to in the Quran, and some are even specifically stated in the Quran, like the Hajj to Mecca. However, the difference in practice of these traditions are accepted in Islam of the Five Pillars, but this does not mean they have all existed since the life of Muhammad. The evidence of differences shows pillars have not always been consistent to what they are today, so it has taken many years for the Pillars to get to their current and classic form."}
{"id": "11061", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11061", "title": "Finance and investment", "text": ""}
{"id": "11062", "revid": "45173454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11062", "title": "Friction", "text": "Friction is the force resisting the relative motion of solid surfaces, fluid layers, and material elements sliding against each other. Types of friction include dry, fluid, lubricated, skin, and internal -- an incomplete list. The study of the processes involved is called tribology, and has a history of more than 2000 years.\nFriction can have dramatic consequences, as illustrated by the use of friction created by rubbing pieces of wood together to start a fire. Another important consequence of many types of friction can be wear, which may lead to performance degradation or damage to components. It is known that frictional energy losses account for about 20% of the total energy expenditure of the world.\nAs briefly discussed later, there are many different contributors to the retarding force in friction, ranging from asperity deformation to the generation of charges and changes in local structure. Friction is not itself a fundamental force, it is a non-conservative force \u2013 work done against friction is path dependent. In the presence of friction, some mechanical energy is transformed to heat as well as the free energy of the structural changes and other types of dissipation, so mechanical energy is not conserved. The complexity of the interactions involved makes the calculation of friction from first principles difficult and it is often easier to use empirical methods for analysis and the development of theory.\nTypes.\nThere are several types of friction:\nHistory.\nMany ancient authors including Aristotle, Vitruvius, and Pliny the Elder, were interested in the cause and mitigation of friction. They were aware of differences between static and kinetic friction with Themistius stating in 350 that \"it is easier to further the motion of a moving body than to move a body at rest\".\nThe classic laws of sliding friction were discovered by Leonardo da Vinci in 1493, a pioneer in tribology, but the laws documented in his notebooks were not published and remained unknown. These laws were rediscovered by Guillaume Amontons in 1699 and became known as Amonton's three laws of dry friction. Amontons presented the nature of friction in terms of surface irregularities and the force required to raise the weight pressing the surfaces together. This view was further elaborated by Bernard Forest de B\u00e9lidor and Leonhard Euler (1750), who derived the angle of repose of a weight on an inclined plane and first distinguished between static and kinetic friction.\nJohn Theophilus Desaguliers (1734) first recognized the role of adhesion in friction. Microscopic forces cause surfaces to stick together; he proposed that friction was the force necessary to tear the adhering surfaces apart.\nThe understanding of friction was further developed by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1785). Coulomb investigated the influence of four main factors on friction: the nature of the materials in contact and their surface coatings; the extent of the surface area; the normal pressure (or load); and the length of time that the surfaces remained in contact (time of repose). Coulomb further considered the influence of sliding velocity, temperature and humidity, in order to decide between the different explanations on the nature of friction that had been proposed. The distinction between static and dynamic friction is made in Coulomb's friction law (see below), although this distinction was already drawn by Johann Andreas von Segner in 1758.\nThe effect of the time of repose was explained by Pieter van Musschenbroek (1762) by considering the surfaces of fibrous materials, with fibers meshing together, which takes a finite time in which the friction increases.\nJohn Leslie (1766\u20131832) noted a weakness in the views of Amontons and Coulomb: If friction arises from a weight being drawn up the inclined plane of successive asperities, then why is it not balanced through descending the opposite slope? Leslie was equally skeptical about the role of adhesion proposed by Desaguliers, which should on the whole have the same tendency to accelerate as to retard the motion. In Leslie's view, friction should be seen as a time-dependent process of flattening, pressing down asperities, which creates new obstacles in what were cavities before.\nIn the long course of the development of the law of conservation of energy and of the first law of thermodynamics, friction was recognised as a mode of conversion of mechanical work into heat. In 1798, Benjamin Thompson reported on cannon boring experiments.\nArthur Jules Morin (1833) developed the concept of sliding versus rolling friction.\nIn 1842, Julius Robert Mayer frictionally generated heat in paper pulp and measured the temperature rise. In 1845, Joule published a paper entitled \"The Mechanical Equivalent of Heat\", in which he specified a numerical value for the amount of mechanical work required to \"produce a unit of heat\", based on the friction of an electric current passing through a resistor, and on the friction of a paddle wheel rotating in a vat of water.\nOsborne Reynolds (1866) derived the equation of viscous flow. This completed the classic empirical model of friction (static, kinetic, and fluid) commonly used today in engineering. In 1877, Fleeming Jenkin and J. A. Ewing investigated the continuity between static and kinetic friction.\nIn 1907, G.H. Bryan published an investigation of the foundations of thermodynamics, \"Thermodynamics: an Introductory Treatise dealing mainly with First Principles and their Direct Applications\". He noted that for a rough body driven over a rough surface, the mechanical work done by the driver exceeds the mechanical work received by the surface. The lost work is accounted for by heat generated by friction.\nOver the years, for example in his 1879 thesis, but particularly in 1926, Planck advocated regarding the generation of heat by rubbing as the most specific way to define heat, and the prime example of an irreversible thermodynamic process.\nThe focus of research during the 20th century has been to understand the physical mechanisms behind friction. Frank Philip Bowden and David Tabor (1950) showed that, at a microscopic level, the actual area of contact between surfaces is a very small fraction of the apparent area. This actual area of contact, caused by asperities increases with pressure. The development of the atomic force microscope (ca. 1986) enabled scientists to study friction at the atomic scale, showing that, on that scale, dry friction is the product of the inter-surface shear stress and the contact area. These two discoveries explain Amonton's first law \"(below)\"; the macroscopic proportionality between normal force and static frictional force between dry surfaces.\nLaws of dry friction.\nThe elementary property of sliding (kinetic) friction were discovered by experiment in the 15th to 18th centuries and were expressed as three empirical laws:\nDry friction.\nDry friction resists relative lateral motion of two solid surfaces in contact. The two regimes of dry friction are 'static friction' (\"stiction\") between non-moving surfaces, and \"kinetic friction\" (sometimes called sliding friction or dynamic friction) between moving surfaces.\nCoulomb friction, named after Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, is an approximate model used to calculate the force of dry friction. It is governed by the model:\nformula_1\nwhere\nThe Coulomb friction formula_2 may take any value from zero up to formula_6, and the direction of the frictional force against a surface is opposite to the motion that surface would experience in the absence of friction. Thus, in the static case, the frictional force is exactly what it must be in order to prevent motion between the surfaces; it balances the net force tending to cause such motion. In this case, rather than providing an estimate of the actual frictional force, the Coulomb approximation provides a threshold value for this force, above which motion would commence. This maximum force is known as traction.\nThe force of friction is always exerted in a direction that opposes movement (for kinetic friction) or potential movement (for static friction) between the two surfaces. For example, a curling stone sliding along the ice experiences a kinetic force slowing it down. For an example of potential movement, the drive wheels of an accelerating car experience a frictional force pointing forward; if they did not, the wheels would spin, and the rubber would slide backwards along the pavement. Note that it is not the direction of movement of the vehicle they oppose, it is the direction of (potential) sliding between tire and road.\nNormal force.\nThe normal force is defined as the net force compressing two parallel surfaces together, and its direction is perpendicular to the surfaces. In the simple case of a mass resting on a horizontal surface, the only component of the normal force is the force due to gravity, where formula_7. In this case, conditions of equilibrium tell us that the magnitude of the friction force is \"zero\", formula_8. In fact, the friction force always satisfies formula_9, with equality reached only at a critical ramp angle (given by formula_10) that is steep enough to initiate sliding.\nThe friction coefficient is an empirical (experimentally measured) structural property that depends only on various aspects of the contacting materials, such as surface roughness. The coefficient of friction is not a function of mass or volume. For instance, a large aluminum block has the same coefficient of friction as a small aluminum block. However, the magnitude of the friction force itself depends on the normal force, and hence on the mass of the block.\nDepending on the situation, the calculation of the normal force formula_11 might include forces other than gravity. If an object is on a and subjected to an external force formula_12 tending to cause it to slide, then the normal force between the object and the surface is just formula_13, where formula_14 is the block's weight and formula_15 is the downward component of the external force. Prior to sliding, this friction force is formula_16, where formula_17 is the horizontal component of the external force. Thus, formula_18 in general. Sliding commences only after this frictional force reaches the value formula_19. Until then, friction is whatever it needs to be to provide equilibrium, so it can be treated as simply a reaction.\nIf the object is on a such as an inclined plane, the normal force from gravity is smaller than formula_14, because less of the force of gravity is perpendicular to the face of the plane. The normal force and the frictional force are ultimately determined using vector analysis, usually via a free body diagram.\nIn general, process for solving any statics problem with friction is to treat contacting surfaces \"tentatively\" as immovable so that the corresponding tangential reaction force between them can be calculated. If this frictional reaction force satisfies formula_18, then the tentative assumption was correct, and it is the actual frictional force. Otherwise, the friction force must be set equal to formula_19, and then the resulting force imbalance would then determine the acceleration associated with slipping.\nCoefficient of friction.\nThe coefficient of friction (COF), often symbolized by the Greek letter \u03bc, is a dimensionless scalar value which equals the ratio of the force of friction between two bodies and the force pressing them together, either during or at the onset of slipping. The coefficient of friction depends on the materials used; for example, ice on steel has a low coefficient of friction, while rubber on pavement has a high coefficient of friction. Coefficients of friction range from near zero to greater than one. The coefficient of friction between two surfaces of similar metals is greater than that between two surfaces of different metals; for example, brass has a higher coefficient of friction when moved against brass, but less if moved against steel or aluminum.\nFor surfaces at rest relative to each other, formula_23, where formula_24 is the \"coefficient of static friction\". This is usually larger than its kinetic counterpart. The coefficient of static friction exhibited by a pair of contacting surfaces depends upon the combined effects of material deformation characteristics and surface roughness, both of which have their origins in the chemical bonding between atoms in each of the bulk materials and between the material surfaces and any adsorbed material. The fractality of surfaces, a parameter describing the scaling behavior of surface asperities, is known to play an important role in determining the magnitude of the static friction.\nFor surfaces in relative motion formula_25, where formula_26 is the \"coefficient of kinetic friction\". The Coulomb friction is equal to formula_2, and the frictional force on each surface is exerted in the direction opposite to its motion relative to the other surface.\nArthur Morin introduced the term and demonstrated the utility of the coefficient of friction. The coefficient of friction is an empirical measurementit has to be measured experimentally, and cannot be found through calculations. Rougher surfaces tend to have higher effective values. Both static and kinetic coefficients of friction depend on the pair of surfaces in contact; for a given pair of surfaces, the coefficient of static friction is \"usually\" larger than that of kinetic friction; in some sets the two coefficients are equal, such as teflon-on-teflon.\nMost dry materials in combination have friction coefficient values between 0.3 and 0.6. Values outside this range are rarer, but teflon, for example, can have a coefficient as low as 0.04. A value of zero would mean no friction at all, an elusive property. Rubber in contact with other surfaces can yield friction coefficients from 1 to 2. Occasionally it is maintained that \"\u03bc\" is always &lt; 1, but this is not true. While in most relevant applications \"\u03bc\" &lt; 1, a value above 1 merely implies that the force required to slide an object along the surface is greater than the normal force of the surface on the object. For example, silicone rubber or acrylic rubber-coated surfaces have a coefficient of friction that can be substantially larger than 1.\nWhile it is often stated that the COF is a \"material property\", it is better categorized as a \"system property\". Unlike true material properties (such as conductivity, dielectric constant, yield strength), the COF for any two materials depends on system variables like temperature, velocity, atmosphere and also what are now popularly described as aging and deaging times; as well as on geometric properties of the interface between the materials, namely surface structure. For example, a copper pin sliding against a thick copper plate can have a COF that varies from 0.6 at low speeds (metal sliding against metal) to below 0.2 at high speeds when the copper surface begins to melt due to frictional heating. The latter speed, of course, does not determine the COF uniquely; if the pin diameter is increased so that the frictional heating is removed rapidly, the temperature drops, the pin remains solid and the COF rises to that of a 'low speed' test.\nIn systems with significant non-uniform stress fields, because local slip occurs before the system slides, the macroscopic coefficient of static friction depends on the applied load, system size, or shape; Amontons' law is not satisfied macroscopically.\nApproximate coefficients of friction.\nUnder certain conditions some materials have very low friction coefficients. An example is (highly ordered pyrolytic) graphite which can have a friction coefficient below 0.01.\nThis ultralow-friction regime is called superlubricity.\nStatic friction.\nStatic friction is friction between two or more solid objects that are not moving relative to each other. For example, static friction can prevent an object from sliding down a sloped surface. The coefficient of static friction, typically denoted as \"\u03bc\"s, is usually higher than the coefficient of kinetic friction. Static friction is considered to arise as the result of surface roughness features across multiple length scales at solid surfaces. These features, known as asperities are present down to nano-scale dimensions and result in true solid to solid contact existing only at a limited number of points accounting for only a fraction of the apparent or nominal contact area. The linearity between applied load and true contact area, arising from asperity deformation, gives rise to the linearity between static frictional force and normal force, found for typical Amonton\u2013Coulomb type friction.\nThe static friction force must be overcome by an applied force before an object can move. The maximum possible friction force between two surfaces before sliding begins is the product of the coefficient of static friction and the normal force: formula_28. When there is no sliding occurring, the friction force can have any value from zero up to formula_29. Any force smaller than formula_29 attempting to slide one surface over the other is opposed by a frictional force of equal magnitude and opposite direction. Any force larger than formula_29 overcomes the force of static friction and causes sliding to occur. The instant sliding occurs, static friction is no longer applicable\u2014the friction between the two surfaces is then called kinetic friction. However, an apparent static friction can be observed even in the case when the true static friction is zero.\nAn example of static friction is the force that prevents a car wheel from slipping as it rolls on the ground. Even though the wheel is in motion, the patch of the tire in contact with the ground is stationary relative to the ground, so it is static rather than kinetic friction. Upon slipping, the wheel friction changes to kinetic friction. An anti-lock braking system operates on the principle of allowing a locked wheel to resume rotating so that the car maintains static friction.\nThe maximum value of static friction, when motion is impending, is sometimes referred to as limiting friction,\nalthough this term is not used universally.\nKinetic friction.\nKinetic friction, also known as dynamic friction or sliding friction, occurs when two objects are moving relative to each other and rub together (like a sled on the ground). The coefficient of kinetic friction is typically denoted as \"\u03bc\"k, and is usually less than the coefficient of static friction for the same materials. However, Richard Feynman comments that \"with dry metals it is very hard to show any difference.\"\nThe friction force between two surfaces after sliding begins is the product of the coefficient of kinetic friction and the normal force: formula_32. This is responsible for the Coulomb damping of an oscillating or vibrating system.\nNew models are beginning to show how kinetic friction can be greater than static friction. In many other cases roughness effects are dominant, for example in rubber to road friction. Surface roughness and contact area affect kinetic friction for micro- and nano-scale objects where surface area forces dominate inertial forces.\nThe origin of kinetic friction at nanoscale can be rationalized by an energy model. During sliding, a new surface forms at the back of a sliding true contact, and existing surface disappears at the front of it. Since all surfaces involve the thermodynamic surface energy, work must be spent in creating the new surface, and energy is released as heat in removing the surface. Thus, a force is required to move the back of the contact, and frictional heat is released at the front.\nAngle of friction.\nFor certain applications, it is more useful to define static friction in terms of the maximum angle before which one of the items will begin sliding. This is called the \"angle of friction\" or \"friction angle\". It is defined as:\nformula_33\nand thus:\nformula_34\nwhere formula_35 is the angle from horizontal and \"\u03bcs\" is the static coefficient of friction between the objects. This formula can also be used to calculate \"\u03bcs\" from empirical measurements of the friction angle.\nFriction at the atomic level.\nDetermining the forces required to move atoms past each other is a challenge in designing nanomachines. In 2008 scientists for the first time were able to move a single atom across a surface, and measure the forces required. Using ultrahigh vacuum and nearly zero temperature (5 K), a modified atomic force microscope was used to drag a cobalt atom, and a carbon monoxide molecule, across surfaces of copper and platinum.\nLimitations of the Coulomb model.\nThe Coulomb approximation follows from the assumptions that: surfaces are in atomically close contact only over a small fraction of their overall area; that this contact area is proportional to the normal force (until saturation, which takes place when all area is in atomic contact); and that the frictional force is proportional to the applied normal force, independently of the contact area. The Coulomb approximation is fundamentally an empirical construct. It is a rule-of-thumb describing the approximate outcome of an extremely complicated physical interaction. The strength of the approximation is its simplicity and versatility. Though the relationship between normal force and frictional force is not exactly linear (and so the frictional force is not entirely independent of the contact area of the surfaces), the Coulomb approximation is an adequate representation of friction for the analysis of many physical systems.\nWhen the surfaces are conjoined, Coulomb friction becomes a very poor approximation (for example, adhesive tape resists sliding even when there is no normal force, or a negative normal force). In this case, the frictional force may depend strongly on the area of contact. Some drag racing tires are adhesive for this reason. However, despite the complexity of the fundamental physics behind friction, the relationships are accurate enough to be useful in many applications.\n\"Negative\" coefficient of friction.\n, a single study has demonstrated the potential for an \"effectively negative coefficient of friction in the low-load regime\", meaning that a decrease in normal force leads to an increase in friction. This contradicts everyday experience in which an increase in normal force leads to an increase in friction. This was reported in the journal \"Nature\" in October 2012 and involved the friction encountered by an atomic force microscope stylus when dragged across a graphene sheet in the presence of graphene-adsorbed oxygen.\nNumerical simulation of the Coulomb model.\nDespite being a simplified model of friction, the Coulomb model is useful in many numerical simulation applications such as multibody systems and granular material. Even its most simple expression encapsulates the fundamental effects of sticking and sliding which are required in many applied cases, although specific algorithms have to be designed in order to efficiently numerically integrate mechanical systems with Coulomb friction and bilateral or unilateral contact. Some quite nonlinear effects, such as the so-called Painlev\u00e9 paradoxes, may be encountered with Coulomb friction.\nDry friction and instabilities.\nDry friction can induce several types of instabilities in mechanical systems which display a stable behaviour in the absence of friction.\nThese instabilities may be caused by the decrease of the friction force with an increasing velocity of sliding, by material expansion due to heat generation during friction (the thermo-elastic instabilities), or by pure dynamic effects of sliding of two elastic materials (the Adams\u2013Martins instabilities). The latter were originally discovered in 1995 by George G. Adams and Jo\u00e3o Arm\u00e9nio Correia Martins for smooth surfaces and were later found in periodic rough surfaces. In particular, friction-related dynamical instabilities are thought to be responsible for brake squeal and the 'song' of a glass harp, phenomena which involve stick and slip, modelled as a drop of friction coefficient with velocity.\nA practically important case is the self-oscillation of the strings of bowed instruments such as the violin, cello, hurdy-gurdy, erhu, etc.\nA connection between dry friction and flutter instability in a simple mechanical system has been discovered, watch the movie for more details.\nFrictional instabilities can lead to the formation of new self-organized patterns (or \"secondary structures\") at the sliding interface, such as in-situ formed tribofilms which are utilized for the reduction of friction and wear in so-called self-lubricating materials.\nFluid friction.\nFluid friction occurs between fluid layers that are moving relative to each other. This internal resistance to flow is named \"viscosity\". In everyday terms, the viscosity of a fluid is described as its \"thickness\". Thus, water is \"thin\", having a lower viscosity, while honey is \"thick\", having a higher viscosity. The less viscous the fluid, the greater its ease of deformation or movement.\nAll real fluids (except superfluids) offer some resistance to shearing and therefore are viscous. For teaching and explanatory purposes it is helpful to use the concept of an inviscid fluid or an ideal fluid which offers no resistance to shearing and so is not viscous.\nLubricated friction.\nLubricated friction is a case of fluid friction where a fluid separates two solid surfaces. Lubrication is a technique employed to reduce wear of one or both surfaces in close proximity moving relative to each another by interposing a substance called a lubricant between the surfaces.\nIn most cases the applied load is carried by pressure generated within the fluid due to the frictional viscous resistance to motion of the lubricating fluid between the surfaces. Adequate lubrication allows smooth continuous operation of equipment, with only mild wear, and without excessive stresses or seizures at bearings. When lubrication breaks down, metal or other components can rub destructively over each other, causing heat and possibly damage or failure.\nSkin friction.\nSkin friction arises from the interaction between the fluid and the skin of the body, and is directly related to the area of the surface of the body that is in contact with the fluid. Skin friction follows the drag equation and rises with the square of the velocity.\nSkin friction is caused by viscous drag in the boundary layer around the object. There are two ways to decrease skin friction: the first is to shape the moving body so that smooth flow is possible, like an airfoil. The second method is to decrease the length and cross-section of the moving object as much as is practicable.\nInternal friction.\nInternal friction is the force resisting motion between the elements making up a solid material while it undergoes deformation.\nPlastic deformation in solids is an irreversible change in the internal molecular structure of an object. This change may be due to either (or both) an applied force or a change in temperature. The change of an object's shape is called strain. The force causing it is called stress.\nElastic deformation in solids is reversible change in the internal molecular structure of an object. Stress does not necessarily cause permanent change. As deformation occurs, internal forces oppose the applied force. If the applied stress is not too large these opposing forces may completely resist the applied force, allowing the object to assume a new equilibrium state and to return to its original shape when the force is removed. This is known as elastic deformation or elasticity.\nRadiation friction.\nAs a consequence of light pressure, Einstein in 1909 predicted the existence of \"radiation friction\" which would oppose the movement of matter. He wrote, \"radiation will exert pressure on both sides of the plate. The forces of pressure exerted on the two sides are equal if the plate is at rest. However, if it is in motion, more radiation will be reflected on the surface that is ahead during the motion (front surface) than on the back surface. The backward-acting force of pressure exerted on the front surface is thus larger than the force of pressure acting on the back. Hence, as the resultant of the two forces, there remains a force that counteracts the motion of the plate and that increases with the velocity of the plate. We will call this resultant 'radiation friction' in brief.\"\nOther types of friction.\nRolling resistance.\nRolling resistance is the force that resists the rolling of a wheel or other circular object along a surface caused by deformations in the object or surface. Generally the force of rolling resistance is less than that associated with kinetic friction. Typical values for the coefficient of rolling resistance are 0.001.\nOne of the most common examples of rolling resistance is the movement of motor vehicle tires on a road, a process which generates heat and sound as by-products.\nBraking friction.\nAny wheel equipped with a brake is capable of generating a large retarding force, usually for the purpose of slowing and stopping a vehicle or piece of rotating machinery. Braking friction differs from rolling friction because the coefficient of friction for rolling friction is small whereas the coefficient of friction for braking friction is designed to be large by choice of materials for brake pads.\nTriboelectric effect.\nRubbing two materials against each other can lead to charge transfer, either electrons or ions. The energy required for this contributes to the friction. In addition, sliding can cause a build-up of electrostatic charge, which can be hazardous if flammable gases or vapours are present. When the static build-up discharges, explosions can be caused by ignition of the flammable mixture.\nBelt friction.\nBelt friction is a physical property observed from the forces acting on a belt wrapped around a pulley, when one end is being pulled. The resulting tension, which acts on both ends of the belt, can be modeled by the belt friction equation.\nIn practice, the theoretical tension acting on the belt or rope calculated by the belt friction equation can be compared to the maximum tension the belt can support. This helps a designer of such a rig to know how many times the belt or rope must be wrapped around the pulley to prevent it from slipping. Mountain climbers and sailing crews demonstrate a standard knowledge of belt friction when accomplishing basic tasks.\nReduction.\nDevices.\nDevices such as wheels, ball bearings, roller bearings, and air cushion or other types of fluid bearings can change sliding friction into a much smaller type of rolling friction.\nMany thermoplastic materials such as nylon, HDPE and PTFE are commonly used in low friction bearings. They are especially useful because the coefficient of friction falls with increasing imposed load. For improved wear resistance, very high molecular weight grades are usually specified for heavy duty or critical bearings.\nLubricants.\nA common way to reduce friction is by using a lubricant, such as oil, water, or grease, which is placed between the two surfaces, often dramatically lessening the coefficient of friction. The science of friction and lubrication is called tribology. Lubricant technology is when lubricants are mixed with the application of science, especially to industrial or commercial objectives.\nSuperlubricity, a recently discovered effect, has been observed in graphite: it is the substantial decrease of friction between two sliding objects, approaching zero levels. A very small amount of frictional energy would still be dissipated.\nLubricants to overcome friction need not always be thin, turbulent fluids or powdery solids such as graphite and talc; acoustic lubrication actually uses sound as a lubricant.\nAnother way to reduce friction between two parts is to superimpose micro-scale vibration to one of the parts. This can be sinusoidal vibration as used in ultrasound-assisted cutting or vibration noise, known as dither.\nEnergy of friction.\nAccording to the law of conservation of energy, no energy is destroyed due to friction, though it may be lost to the system of concern. Mechanical energy is transformed into heat. A sliding hockey puck comes to rest because friction converts its kinetic energy into heat which raises the internal energy of the puck and the ice surface. Since heat quickly dissipates, many early philosophers, including Aristotle, wrongly concluded that moving objects come to rest spontaneously.\nWhen an object is pushed along a surface along a path C, the energy converted to heat is given by a line integral, in accordance with the definition of work\nwhere\nDissipation of energy by friction in a process is a classic example of thermodynamic irreversibility.\nWork of friction.\nThe work done by friction can translate into deformation, wear, and heat that can affect the contact surface properties (even the coefficient of friction between the surfaces). This can be beneficial as in polishing. The work of friction is used to mix and join materials such as in the process of friction welding. Excessive erosion or wear of mating sliding surfaces occurs when work due to frictional forces rise to unacceptable levels. Harder corrosion particles caught between mating surfaces in relative motion (fretting) exacerbates wear of frictional forces. As surfaces are worn by work due to friction, fit and surface finish of an object may degrade until it no longer functions properly. For example, bearing seizure or failure may result from excessive wear due to work of friction.\nIn the reference frame of the interface between two surfaces, static friction does \"no\" work, because there is never displacement between the surfaces. In the same reference frame, kinetic friction is always in the direction opposite the motion, and does \"negative\" work. However, friction can do \"positive\" work in certain frames of reference. One can see this by placing a heavy box on a rug, then pulling on the rug quickly. In this case, the box slides backwards relative to the rug, but moves forward relative to the frame of reference in which the floor is stationary. Thus, the kinetic friction between the box and rug accelerates the box in the same direction that the box moves, doing \"positive\" work.\nWhen sliding takes place between two rough bodies in contact, the algebraic sum of the works done is different from zero, and the algebraic sum of the quantities of heat gained by the two bodies is equal to the quantity of work lost by friction, and the total quantity of heat gained is positive. In a natural thermodynamic process, the work done by an agency in the surroundings of a thermodynamic system or working body is greater than the work received by the body, because of friction. Thermodynamic work is measured by changes in a body's state variables, sometimes called work-like variables, other than temperature and entropy. Examples of work-like variables, which are ordinary macroscopic physical variables and which occur in conjugate pairs, are pressure \u2013 volume, and electric field \u2013 electric polarization. Temperature and entropy are a specifically thermodynamic conjugate pair of state variables. They can be affected microscopically at an atomic level, by mechanisms such as friction, thermal conduction, and radiation. The part of the work done by an agency in the surroundings that does not change the volume of the working body but is dissipated in friction, is called isochoric work. It is received as heat, by the working body and sometimes partly by a body in the surroundings. It is not counted as thermodynamic work received by the working body.\nApplications.\nFriction is an important factor in many engineering disciplines."}
{"id": "11063", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11063", "title": "February 7", "text": ""}
{"id": "11064", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11064", "title": "Faith", "text": "Faith is confidence or trust in a person, thing, or concept. In the context of religion, faith is \"belief in God or in the doctrines or teachings of religion\".\nAccording to the Merriam-Webster's Dictionary, faith has multiple definitions, including \"something that is believed especially with strong conviction\", \"complete trust\", \"belief and trust in and loyalty to God\", as well as \"a firm belief in something for which there is no proof\".\nReligious people often think of faith as confidence based on a perceived degree of warrant, or evidence, while others who are more skeptical of religion tend to think of faith as simply belief without evidence.\nIn the Roman world, 'faith' (Latin: ) was understood without particular association with gods or beliefs. Instead, it was understood as a paradoxical set of reciprocal ideas: voluntary will and voluntary restraint in the sense of father over family or host over guest, whereby one party willfully surrenders to a party who could harm but chooses not to, thereby entrusting or confiding in them.\nAccording to Thomas Aquinas, faith is \"an act of the intellect assenting to the truth at the command of the will\".\nReligion has a long tradition, since the ancient world, of analyzing divine questions using common human experiences such as sensation, reason, science, and history that do not rely on revelation\u2014called Natural theology.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"faith\" finds its roots in the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root *, signifying concepts of trust, confidence, and persuasion. This root has given rise to various terms across different languages, such as Greek (\"\"), meaning \"faith\", and Latin , meaning \"trust\", \"faith\", \"confidence\".\nFurthermore, the Proto-Indo-European root * adds another layer to the word's etymology, emphasizing the notions of truth and trustworthiness. This root is evident in English words like \"veracity\", \"verity\", and \"verify\", as well as in Latin with , meaning \"true\".\nThe term \"faith\" in English emerged in the mid-13th century, evolving from Anglo-French and Old French forms like and , ultimately tracing back to the Latin . This Latin term, rooted in the PIE root *, encompassed meanings such as \"trust\", \"confidence\", and \"belief\".\nReligious faith.\nExtent of religious faith.\nReferring to \"religions\" (plural), Pope Francis claims that \"the majority of people living on our planet profess to be believers\".\nChristianity.\nThe word translated as \"faith\" in English-language editions of the New Testament, the Greek word (), can also be translated as \"belief\", \"faithfulness\", or \"trust\". Faith can also be translated from the Greek verb (), meaning \"to trust, to have confidence, faithfulness, to be reliable, to assure\". Christianity encompasses various views regarding the nature of faith. Some see faith as being persuaded or convinced that something is true. In this view, a person believes something when they are presented with adequate evidence that it is true. The 13th-century theologian Saint Thomas Aquinas did not hold that faith is mere opinion: on the contrary, he held that it represents a mean (understood in the Aristotelian sense) between excessive reliance on science (i.e. demonstration) and excessive reliance on opinion.\nAccording to Teresa Morgan, faith was understood by early Christians within the cultural milieu of the period as a relationship that created a community based on trust, instead of a set of mental beliefs or feelings of the heart.\nNumerous commentators discuss the results of faith. Some believe that true faith results in good works, while others believe that while faith in Jesus brings eternal life, it does not necessarily result in good works.\nRegardless of the approach taken to faith, all Christians agree that the Christian faith (in the sense of Christian practice) is aligned with the ideals and the example of the life of Jesus. The Christian contemplates the mystery of God and his grace and seeks to know and become obedient to God. To a Christian, the faith is not static, but causes one to learn more of God and to grow in faith; Christian faith has its origin in God.\nIn Christianity, faith causes change as it seeks a greater understanding of God. Faith is not fideism or simple obedience to a set of rules or statements. Before Christians have faith, but they must also understand in whom and in what they have faith. Without understanding, there cannot be true faith, and that understanding is built on the foundation of the community of believers, the scriptures and traditions, and on the personal experiences of the believer.\nStrength of faith.\nChristians may recognize different degrees of faith when they encourage each other to, and themselves strive to, develop, grow, and/or deepen their faith.\nThis may imply that one can measure faith. Willingness to undergo martyrdom indicates a proxy for depth of faith but does not provide an everyday measurement for the average contemporary Christian. Within the Calvinist tradition the degree of prosperity may serve as an analog of the level of faith.\nOther Christian strands may rely on personal self-evaluation to measure the intensity of an individual's faith, with associated difficulties in calibrating to any scale. Solemn affirmations of a creed (a statement of faith) provide Various tribunals of the Inquisition, however, concerned themselves with precisely evaluating the orthodoxy of the faith of those it examined \u2013 to acquit or to punish in varying degrees.\nThe classification of different degrees of faith allows that faith and its expression may wax and wane in fervor\u2014during the lifetime of a faithful individual and/or over the various historical centuries of a society with an embedded religious system. Thus, one can speak of an \"Age of Faith\"\nor of the \"decay\" of a society's religiosity into corruption,\nsecularism,\nor atheism,\u2014interpretable as the ultimate loss of faith.\nChristian apologetic views.\nIn contrast to Richard Dawkins' view of faith as \"blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even in the teeth of evidence\", Alister McGrath quotes the Oxford Anglican theologian W. H. Griffith Thomas (1861\u20131924), who states that faith is \"not blind, but intelligent\" and that it \"commences with the conviction of the mind based on adequate evidence...\", which McGrath sees as \"a good and reliable definition, synthesizing the core elements of the characteristic Christian understanding of faith\".\nAmerican biblical scholar Archibald Thomas Robertson (1863\u20131934) stated that the Greek word used for \"faith\" in the New Testament (over two hundred forty times), and rendered \"assurance\" in , is \"an old verb meaning 'to furnish', used regularly by Demosthenes for bringing forward evidence.\" Tom Price (Oxford Centre for Christian Apologetics) affirms that when the New Testament talks about faith positively it only uses words derived from the Greek root [] which means \"to be persuaded\".\nBritish Christian apologist John Lennox argues that \"faith conceived as a belief that lacks warrant is very different from faith conceived as a belief that has warrant\". He states that \"the use of the adjective 'blind' to describe 'faith' indicates that faith is not necessarily, or always, or indeed normally, blind\". \"The validity, or warrant, of faith or belief depends on the strength of the evidence on which the belief is based.\" \"We all know how to distinguish between blind faith and evidence-based faith. We are well aware that faith is only justified if there is evidence to back it up.\" \"Evidence-based faith is the normal concept on which we base our everyday lives.\"\nPeter S. Williams holds that \"the classic Christian tradition has always valued rationality and does not hold that faith involves the complete abandonment of reason while believing in the teeth of evidence\". Quoting Moreland, faith is defined as \"a trust in and commitment to what we have reason to believe is true\".\nRegarding doubting Thomas in , Williams points out that \"Thomas wasn't asked to believe without evidence\". He was asked to believe based on the other disciples' testimony. Thomas initially lacked the first-hand experience of the evidence that had convinced them... Moreover, the reason John gives for recounting these events is that what he saw is evidence... Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples... But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name. .\"\nConcerning doubting Thomas, Michael R. Allen wrote: \"Thomas's definition of faith implies adherence to conceptual propositions for the sake of personal knowledge, knowledge of and about a person \"qua\" person\".\nKenneth Boa and Robert M. Bowman Jr. describe a classic understanding of faith that is referred to as \"evidentialism\", and which is part of a larger epistemological tradition called \"classical foundationalism\", which is accompanied by \"deontologism\", which holds that humans must regulate their beliefs following evidentialist structures. They show how this can go too far, and Alvin Plantinga While Plantinga upholds that faith may be the result of evidence testifying to the reliability of the source (of the truth claims), yet he sees having faith as being the result of hearing the truth of the gospel with the internal persuasion by the Holy Spirit moving and enabling him to believe. \"Christian belief is produced in the believer by the internal instigation of the Holy Spirit, endorsing the teachings of Scripture, which is itself divinely inspired by the Holy Spirit. The result of the work of the Holy Spirit is faith.\"\nCatholicism.\nThe four-part \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" (CCC) gives Part One to \"The Profession of Faith\". This section describes the content of faith. It elaborates and expands, particularly upon the Apostles' Creed. CCC 144 initiates a section on the \"Obedience of Faith\".\nIn the theology of Pope John Paul II, faith is understood in personal terms as a trusting commitment of person to person and thus involves Christian commitment to the divine person of Jesus Christ.\nMethodism.\nIn Methodism, faith plays an important role in justification, which occurs during the New Birth. The Emmanuel Association, a Methodist denomination in the conservative holiness movement, teaches:\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Articles of Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints states that \"faith in the Lord Jesus Christ\" is the first principle of the gospel.\nSome alternative, yet impactful, ideas regarding the nature of faith were presented by church founder Joseph Smith in a collection of sermons, which are now published as the \"Lectures on Faith\".\nBuddhism.\nFaith in Buddhism (, ) refers to a serene commitment to the practice of the Buddha's teaching and trust in enlightened or highly developed beings, such as Buddhas or \"bodhisattvas\" (those aiming to become a Buddha). Buddhists usually recognize multiple objects of faith, but many are especially devoted to one particular object of faith, such as one particular Buddha.\nIn early Buddhism, faith was focused on the Three Jewels or Refuges, namely, Gautama Buddha, his teaching (the \"Dhamma\"), and the community of spiritually developed followers, or the monastic community seeking enlightenment (the \"Sangha\"). Although offerings to the monastic community were valued highest, early Buddhism did not morally condemn peaceful offerings to deities. A faithful devotee was called \"up\u0101saka\" or \"up\u0101sika\", for which no formal declaration was required. In early Buddhism, personal verification was valued highest in attaining the truth, and sacred scriptures, reason, or faith in a teacher were considered less valuable sources of authority. As important as faith was, it was a mere initial step to the path to wisdom and enlightenment, and was obsolete or redefined at the final stage of that path.\nWhile faith in Buddhism does not imply \"blind faith\", Buddhist practice nevertheless requires a degree of trust, primarily in the spiritual attainment of Gautama Buddha. Faith in Buddhism can still be described as faith in the Three Jewels (the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha). It is intended to lead to the goal of enlightenment, or \"bodhi\", and \"Nirvana\". Volitionally, faith implies a resolute and courageous act of will. It combines the steadfast resolution that one will do a thing with the self-confidence that one can do it.\nIn the later stratum of Buddhist history, especially Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism, faith was given a much more important role. The concept of the Buddha Nature was developed, as devotion to Buddhas and \"bodhisattvas\" residing in Pure Lands became commonplace. With the arising of the cult of the Lotus S\u016btra, faith gained a central role in Buddhist practice, which was further amplified with the development of devotion to the Amitabha Buddha in Pure Land Buddhism. In the Japanese form of Pure Land Buddhism, under the teachers H\u014dnen and Shinran, only entrusting faith toward the Amitabha Buddha was believed to be a fruitful form of practice, as the practice of celibacy, morality, and other Buddhist disciplines were dismissed as no longer effective in this day and age, or as contradicting the virtue of faith. Faith was defined as a state similar to enlightenment, with a sense of self-negation and humility.\nThus, the role of faith increased throughout Buddhist history. However, from the nineteenth century onward, Buddhist modernism in countries like Sri Lanka and Japan, and also in the West, has downplayed and criticized the role of faith in Buddhism. Faith in Buddhism still has a role in modern Asia and the West but is understood and defined differently than in traditional interpretations. Within the Dalit Buddhist Movement communities, taking refuge is defined not only as a religious, but also a political choice.\nHinduism.\nBhakti () literally means \"attachment, participation, fondness for, homage, faith, love, devotion, worship, purity\". It was originally used in Hinduism, referring to devotion and love for a personal god or a representational god by a devotee. In ancient texts such as the \"Shvetashvatara Upanishad\", the term simply means participation, devotion, and love for any endeavor, while in the \"Bhagavad Gita\", it connotes one of the possible paths of spirituality and towards moksha, as in .\nAhimsa, also referred to as nonviolence, is a fundamental tenet of Hinduism that advocates harmonious and peaceful co-existence and evolutionary growth in grace and wisdom for all humankind unconditionally.\nIn Hinduism, most of the Vedic prayers begins with the chants of Om. Om is the Sanskrit symbol that amazingly resonates the peacefulness ensconced within one's higher self. Om is considered to have a profound effect on the body and mind of the one who chants and also creates a calmness, serenity, healing, strength of its own to prevail within and also in the surrounding environment.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, a believer's faith in the metaphysical aspects of Islam is called (), which is complete submission to the will of God, not unquestioning or blind belief. A man must build his faith on well-grounded convictions beyond any reasonable doubt and above uncertainty. According to the Quran, must be accompanied by righteous deeds and the two together are necessary for entry into Paradise. In the Hadith of Gabriel, in addition to \"Islam\" and form the three dimensions of the Islamic religion.\nMuhammad referred to the six axioms of faith in the Hadith of Gabriel: \" is that you believe in God and His Angels and His Books and His Messengers and the Hereafter and the good and evil fate [ordained by your God].\" The first five are mentioned together in the Qur'an. The Quran states that faith can grow with remembrance of God. The Qur'an also states that nothing in this world should be dearer to a true believer than faith.\nJudaism.\nJudaism recognizes the positive value of (generally translated as \"faith\", or \"trust in God\") and the negative status of the (heretic), but faith is not as stressed or as central as it is in some other religions, especially Christianity or Islam. Faith could be a necessary means for being a practicing religious Jew, but the emphasis is placed on true knowledge, true prophecy, and practice rather than on faith itself. Very rarely does it relate to any teaching that must be believed. Judaism does not require one to explicitly identify God (a key tenet of Christian faith, which is called Avodah Zarah (foreign worship) in Judaism, a minor form of idol worship, a big sin and strictly forbidden to Jews). Rather, in Judaism, one is to honor a (personal) idea of God, supported by the many principles quoted in the Talmud to define Judaism, mostly by what it is not. Thus there is no established formulation of Jewish principles of faith which are mandatory for all (observant) Jews.\nIn the Jewish scriptures, trust in God \u2013 \u2013 refers to how God acts toward his people and how they are to respond to him; it is rooted in the everlasting covenant established in the Torah, notably Deuteronomy 7:9:\nThe specific tenets that compose required belief and their application to the times have been disputed throughout Jewish history. Today many, but not all, Orthodox Jews have accepted Maimonides's Thirteen Principles of Belief.\nA traditional example of as seen in the Jewish annals is found in the person of Abraham. On several occasions, Abraham both accepts statements from God that seem impossible and offers obedient actions in response to direction from God to do things that seem implausible.\nThe Talmud describes how a thief also believes in G\u2011d: On the brink of his forced entry, as he is about to risk his life\u2014and the life of his victim\u2014he cries out with all sincerity, \"G\u2011d help me!\" The thief has faith that there is a G\u2011d who hears his cries, yet it escapes him that this G\u2011d may be able to provide for him without requiring that he abrogate G\u2011d's will by stealing from others. For to affect him in this way he needs study and contemplation.\nSikhism.\nFaith is not a religious concept in Sikhism. However, the five Sikh symbols, known as Kakaars or Five Ks (in Punjabi known as or ), are sometimes referred to as the \"Five articles of Faith\". The articles include (uncut hair), (small wooden comb), (circular steel or iron bracelet), (sword/dagger), and (special undergarment). Baptised Sikhs are bound to wear those five articles of faith, at all times, to save them from bad company and keep them close to God.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, faith is meant, first, as conscious knowledge, second, as the practice of good deeds, and ultimately as the acceptance of the divine authority of the Manifestations of God. In the religion's view, faith and knowledge are both required for spiritual growth. Faith involves more than outward obedience to this authority, but also must be based on a deep personal understanding of religious teachings.\nSecular faith.\nSecular faith refers to a belief or conviction that is not based on religious or supernatural doctrines. Secular faith can arise from a wide range of sources and can take many forms, depending on the individual's beliefs and experiences, including:\nEpistemological analysis.\nThe epistemological study focuses on epistemic justification, the rationality of belief, and various related issues. A justified belief is a belief that is well-supported by evidence and reasons, and that is arrived at through a reliable and trustworthy process of inquiry.\nFaith is often regarded as a form of belief that may not necessarily rely on empirical evidence. However, when religious faith does make empirical claims, these claims need to undergo scientific testing to determine their validity. On the other hand, some beliefs may not make empirical claims and instead focus on non-empirical issues such as ethics, morality, and spiritual practices. In these cases, it may be necessary to evaluate the validity of these beliefs based on their internal coherence and logical consistency, rather than empirical testing.\nThere is a wide spectrum of opinion concerning the epistemological validity of faith \u2014 that is, whether it is a reliable way to acquire true beliefs.\nFideism.\nFideism is considered to be a philosophical position rather than a comprehensive epistemological theory. It maintains that faith is independent of reason, or that reason and faith are hostile to each other and faith is superior at arriving at particular truths (see natural theology). Fideism is not a synonym for religious belief but describes a particular philosophical proposition concerning the relationship between faith's appropriate jurisdiction at arriving at truths, contrasted against reason. It states that faith is needed to determine some philosophical and religious truths, and it questions the ability of reason to arrive at all truth. The word and concept had its origin in the mid to late-19th century by way of Catholic thought, in a movement called Traditionalism. The Roman Catholic Magisterium has, however, repeatedly condemned fideism.\nCritics of fideism suggest that it is not a justified or rational position from an epistemological standpoint. Fideism holds that religious beliefs cannot be justified or evaluated based on evidence or reason and that faith alone is a sufficient basis for belief. This position has been criticized because it leads to dogmatism, irrationality, and a rejection of the importance of reason and evidence in understanding the world.\nWilliam Alston argues that while faith is an important aspect of religious belief, it must be grounded in reason and evidence to be justified.\nReligious epistemology.\nReligious epistemologists formulated and defended reasons for the rationality of accepting belief in God without the support of an argument. Some religious epistemologists hold that belief in God is more analogous to belief in a person than belief in a scientific hypothesis. Human relations demand trust and commitment. If belief in God is more like belief in other persons, then the trust that is appropriate to persons will be appropriate to God. American psychologist and philosopher William James offers a similar argument in his lecture \"The Will to Believe\".\nFoundationalism is a view about the structure of justification or knowledge. Foundationalism holds that all knowledge and justified belief are ultimately based upon what are called properly basic beliefs. This position is intended to resolve the infinite regress problem in epistemology. According to foundationalism, a belief is epistemically justified only if it is justified by properly basic beliefs. One of the significant developments in foundationalism is the rise of reformed epistemology.\nReformed epistemology is a view about the epistemology of religious belief, which holds that belief in God can be properly basic. Analytic philosophers Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff develop this view. Plantinga holds that a person may rationally believe in God even though the person does not possess sufficient evidence to convince an agnostic. One difference between reformed epistemology and fideism is that the former requires defense against known objections, whereas the latter might dismiss such objections as irrelevant. Plantinga developed reformed epistemology in \"Warranted Christian Belief\" as a form of externalism that holds that the justification-conferring factors for a belief may include external factors.\nSome theistic philosophers have defended theism by granting evidentialism but supporting theism through deductive arguments whose premises are considered justifiable. Some of these arguments are probabilistic, either in the sense of having weight but being inconclusive or in the sense of having a mathematical probability assigned to them. Notable in this regard are the cumulative arguments presented by British philosopher Basil Mitchell and analytic philosopher Richard Swinburne, whose arguments are based on Bayesian probability. In a notable exposition of his arguments, Swinburne appeals to an inference for the best explanation.\nProfessor of Mathematics and philosopher of science at University of Oxford John Lennox justifies his religious belief in Jesus's resurrection and miracles by believing God's capability of breaking the commonly recognized law of nature. John Lennox has stated, \"Faith is not a leap in the dark; it's the exact opposite. It's a commitment based on evidence\u2026 It is irrational to reduce all faith to blind faith and then subject it to ridicule. That provides a very anti-intellectual and convenient way of avoiding intelligent discussion.\" He criticises Richard Dawkins as a famous proponent of asserting that faith equates to holding a belief without evidence, thus that it is possible to hold belief without evidence, for failing to provide evidence for this assertion.\nCritics of reformed epistemology argue that it fails to provide a compelling justification for belief in God and that it is unable to account for the diversity of religious belief and experience. They also argue that it can lead to a kind of epistemic relativism, in which all religious beliefs are considered equally valid and justified, regardless of their content or coherence. Despite these criticisms, reformed epistemology has been influential in the contemporary philosophy of religion and continues to be an active area of debate and discussion.\nEmpirical claims.\nMany religious beliefs are intended to be metaphorical or symbolic, but there are also religious beliefs that are taken quite literally by believers. For example, some Christians believe that the Earth was created in six literal days, and some Muslims believe that the Quran contains scientific facts that were not known to humans at the time of its revelation. Furthermore, even if a religious belief is intended to be metaphorical or symbolic, it can still be subject to empirical testing if it makes claims about the world. For example, the claim that the Earth is the center of the universe can be interpreted as a metaphorical representation of humanity's special place in the cosmos, but it also makes an empirical claim that can be tested by scientific observation.\nMorality and faith.\nFrom a scientific perspective, morality is not dependent on faith. While some individuals may claim that their morality is rooted in their faith or religious beliefs, there is evidence to suggest that morality is also influenced by other factors, such as social and cultural norms, empathy, and reason. Studies have shown that individuals from diverse cultural and religious backgrounds tend to share many moral values, suggesting that morality is not solely dependent on faith. Additionally, research in the fields of psychology, neuroscience, and evolutionary biology has shed light on the biological and cognitive mechanisms underlying moral decision-making, providing further evidence that morality is not exclusively dependent on faith.\nCriticism.\nBertrand Russell wrote:\nEvolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins criticizes all faith by generalizing from specific faith in propositions that conflict directly with scientific evidence. He describes faith as belief without evidence; a process of active non-thinking. He states that it is a practice that only degrades our understanding of the natural world by allowing anyone to make a claim about nature that is based solely on their personal thoughts, and possibly distorted perceptions, that does not require testing against nature, cannot make reliable and consistent predictions, and is not subject to peer review.\nPhilosophy professor Peter Boghossian argues that reason and evidence are the only way to determine which \"claims about the world are likely true\". Different religious traditions make different religious claims, and Boghossian asserts that faith alone cannot resolve conflicts between these without evidence. He gives an example of the belief held by Muslims that Muhammad (who died in the year 632) was the last prophet, and the contradictory belief held by Mormons that Joseph Smith (born in 1805) was a prophet. Boghossian asserts that faith has no \"built-in corrective mechanism\". For factual claims, he gives the example of the belief that the Earth is 4,000 years old. With only faith and no reason or evidence, he argues, there is no way to correct this claim if it is inaccurate. Boghossian advocates thinking of faith either as \"belief without evidence\" or \"pretending to know things you don't know\".\nFriedrich Nietzsche expressed his criticism of the Christian idea of faith in passage 51 of The Antichrist: The fact that faith, under certain circumstances, may work for blessedness, but that this blessedness produced by an id\u00e9e fixe by no means makes the idea itself true, and the fact that faith actually moves no mountains, but instead raises them up where there were none before: all this is made sufficiently clear by a walk through a lunatic asylum. Not, of course, to a priest: for his instincts prompt him to the lie that sickness is not sickness and lunatic asylums not lunatic asylums. Christianity finds sickness necessary, just as the Greek spirit had need of a superabundance of health\u2014the actual ulterior purpose of the whole system of salvation of the church is to make people ill. And the church itself\u2014doesn't it set up a Catholic lunatic asylum as the ultimate ideal?\u2014The whole earth as a madhouse?\u2014The sort of religious man that the church wants is a typical d\u00e9cadent; the moment at which a religious crisis dominates a people is always marked by epidemics of nervous disorder; the \"inner world\" of the religious man is so much like the \"inner world\" of the overstrung and exhausted that it is difficult to distinguish between them; the \"highest\" states of mind, held up before mankind by Christianity as of supreme worth, are actually epileptoid in form\u2014the church has granted the name of holy only to lunatics or to gigantic frauds in majorem dei honorem...\nGustave Le Bon emphasizes the irrational nature of faith and suggests that it is often based on emotions rather than reason. He argues that faith can be used to manipulate and control people, particularly in the context of religious or political movements. In this sense, Le Bon views faith as a tool that can be wielded by those in power to shape the beliefs and behaviors of the masses.\nFaith as in 'strong unshakable faith' is considered a virtue by many religious believers. This has been criticized since beliefs, including religious beliefs, should not be \"exempt from critical evaluation\" even if questioning or reconsidering these is difficult."}
{"id": "11086", "revid": "3311318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11086", "title": "Flavian", "text": "Flavian may refer to:"}
{"id": "11090", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11090", "title": "Forest", "text": "A forest is an ecosystem characterized by a dense community of trees. Hundreds of definitions of forest are used throughout the world, incorporating factors such as tree density, tree height, land use, legal standing, and ecological function. The United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines a forest as, \"Land spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 meters and a canopy cover of more than 10 percent, or trees able to reach these thresholds \"in situ\". It does not include land that is predominantly under agricultural or urban use.\" Using this definition, \"Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020\" found that forests covered , or approximately 31 percent of the world's land area in 2020.\nForests are the largest terrestrial ecosystems of Earth by area, and are found around the globe. 45 percent of forest land is in the tropical latitudes. The next largest share of forests are found in subarctic climates, followed by temperate, and subtropical zones.\nForests account for 75% of the gross primary production of the Earth's biosphere, and contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass. Net primary production is estimated at 21.9 gigatonnes of biomass per year for tropical forests, 8.1 for temperate forests, and 2.6 for boreal forests.\nForests form distinctly different biomes at different latitudes and elevations, and with different precipitation and evapotranspiration rates. These biomes include boreal forests in subarctic climates, tropical moist forests and tropical dry forests around the Equator, and temperate forests at the middle latitudes. Forests form in areas of the Earth with high rainfall, while drier conditions produce a transition to savanna. However, in areas with intermediate rainfall levels, forest transitions to savanna rapidly when the percentage of land that is covered by trees drops below 40 to 45 percent. Research conducted in the Amazon rainforest shows that trees can alter rainfall rates across a region, releasing water from their leaves in anticipation of seasonal rains to trigger the wet season early. Because of this, seasonal rainfall in the Amazon begins two to three months earlier than the climate would otherwise allow. Deforestation in the Amazon and anthropogenic climate change hold the potential to interfere with this process, causing the forest to pass a threshold where it transitions into savanna.\nDeforestation threatens many forest ecosystems. Deforestation occurs when humans remove trees from a forested area by cutting or burning, either to harvest timber or to make way for farming. Most deforestation today occurs in tropical forests. The vast majority of this deforestation is because of the production of four commodities: wood, beef, soy, and palm oil. Over the past 2,000 years, the area of land covered by forest in Europe has been reduced from 80% to 34%. Large areas of forest have also been cleared in China and in the eastern United States, in which only 0.1% of land was left undisturbed. Almost half of Earth's forest area (49 percent) is relatively intact, while 9 percent is found in fragments with little or no connectivity. Tropical rainforests and boreal coniferous forests are the least fragmented, whereas subtropical dry forests and temperate oceanic forests are among the most fragmented. Roughly 80 percent of the world's forest area is found in patches larger than . The remaining 20 percent is located in more than 34 million patches around the world \u2013 the vast majority less than in size.\nHuman society and forests can affect one another positively or negatively. Forests provide ecosystem services to humans and serve as tourist attractions. Forests can also affect people's health. Human activities, including unsustainable use of forest resources, can negatively affect forest ecosystems.\nDefinitions.\nAlthough the word \"forest\" is commonly used, there is no universally recognised precise definition, with more than 800 definitions of forest used around the world. Although a forest is usually defined by the presence of trees, under many definitions an area completely lacking trees may still be considered a forest if it grew trees in the past, will grow trees in the future, or was legally designated as a forest regardless of vegetation type.\nThere are three broad categories of definitions of forest in use: administrative, land use, and land cover. Administrative definitions are legal designations, and may not reflect the type of vegetation that grows upon the land; an area can be legally designated \"forest\" even if no trees grow on it. Land-use definitions are based on the primary purpose the land is used for. Under a land-use definition, any area used primarily for harvesting timber, including areas that have been cleared by harvesting, disease, fire, or for the construction of roads and infrastructure, are still defined as forests, even if they contain no trees. Land-cover definitions define forests based upon the density of trees, area of tree canopy cover, or area of the land occupied by the cross-section of tree trunks (basal area) meeting a particular threshold. This type of definition depends upon the presence of trees sufficient to meet the threshold, or at least of immature trees that are expected to meet the threshold once they mature.\nUnder land-cover definitions, there is considerable variation on where the cutoff points are between a forest, woodland, and savanna. Under some definitions, to be considered a forest requires very high levels of tree canopy cover, from 60% to 100%, which excludes woodlands and savannas, which have a lower canopy cover. Other definitions consider savannas to be a type of forest, and include all areas with tree canopies over 10%.\nSome areas covered with trees are legally defined as agricultural areas, for example Norway spruce plantations, under Austrian forest law, when the trees are being grown as Christmas trees and are below a certain height.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"\" derives from the Old French \"forest\" (also \"for\u00e8s\"), denoting \"forest, vast expanse covered by trees\"; \"forest\" was first introduced into English as the word denoting wild land set aside for hunting without necessarily having trees on the land. Possibly a borrowing, probably via Frankish or Old High German, of the Medieval Latin , denoting \"open wood\", Carolingian scribes first used \"foresta\" in the capitularies of Charlemagne, specifically to denote the royal hunting grounds of the king. The word was not endemic to the Romance languages, e.g., native words for \"forest\" in the Romance languages derived from the Latin \"silva\", which denoted \"forest\" and \"wood(land)\" (cf. the English \"sylva\" and \"sylvan\"; the Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese \"selva\"; the Romanian \"silv\u0103\"; the Old French \"selve\"). Cognates of forest in Romance languages\u2014e.g., the Italian \"foresta\", Spanish and Portuguese \"floresta\", etc.\u2014are all ultimately derivations of the French word.\nThe precise origin of Medieval Latin is obscure. Some authorities claim the word derives from the Late Latin phrase \"forestam silvam\", denoting \"the outer wood\"; others claim the word is a Latinisation of the Frankish *\"forhist\", denoting \"forest, wooded country\", and was assimilated to \"forestam silvam\", pursuant to the common practice of Frankish scribes. The Old High German \"forst\" denoting \"forest\"; Middle Low German \"vorst\" denoting \"forest\"; Old English \"fyrh\u00fe\" denoting \"forest, woodland, game preserve, hunting ground\" (English \"frith\"); and Old Norse \"f\u00fdri\", denoting \"coniferous forest\"; all of which derive from the Proto-Germanic *\"furh\u00edsa-\", *\"furh\u00ed\u00feija-\", denoting \"a fir-wood, \"coniferous\" forest\", from the Proto-Indo-European *\"perkwu-\", denoting \"a \"coniferous\" or mountain forest, wooded height\" all attest to the Frankish *\"forhist\".\nUses of \"forest\" in English to denote any uninhabited and unenclosed area are presently considered archaic. The Norman rulers of England introduced the word as a legal term, as seen in Latin texts such as Magna Carta, to denote uncultivated land that was legally designated for hunting by feudal nobility (see royal forest).\nThese hunting forests did not necessarily contain any trees. Because that often included significant areas of woodland, \"forest\" eventually came to connote woodland in general, regardless of tree density. By the beginning of the fourteenth century, English texts used the word in all three of its senses: common, legal, and archaic. Other English words used to denote \"an area with a high density of trees\" are \"firth\", \"frith\", \"holt\", \"weald\", \"wold\", \"wood\", and \"woodland\". Unlike \"forest\", these are all derived from Old English and were not borrowed from another language. Some present classifications reserve \"woodland\" for denoting a locale with more open space between trees, and distinguish kinds of woodlands as \"open forests\" and \"closed forests\", premised on their crown covers. Finally, \"sylva\" (plural \"sylvae\" or, less classically, \"sylvas\") is a peculiar English spelling of the Latin \"silva\", denoting a \"woodland\", and has precedent in English, including its plural forms. While its use as a synonym of \"forest\", and as a Latinate word denoting a woodland, may be admitted; in a specific technical sense it is restricted to denoting the \"species\" of trees that comprise the woodlands of a region, as in its sense in the subject of silviculture. The resorting to \"sylva\" in English indicates more precisely the denotation that the use of \"forest\" intends.\nEvolutionary history.\nThe first known forests on Earth arose in the Middle Devonian (approximately 390 million years ago), with the evolution of cladoxylopsid plants like \"Calamophyton\". Appeared in the Late Devonian, \"Archaeopteris\" was both tree-like and fern-like plant, growing to in height or more. It quickly spread throughout the world, from the equator to subpolar latitudes. It is the first species known to cast shade due to its fronds and forming soil from its roots. \"Archaeopteris\" was deciduous, dropping its fronds onto the forest floor, the shade, soil, and forest duff from the dropped fronds creating the early forest. The shed organic matter altered the freshwater environment, slowing its flow and providing food. This promoted freshwater fish.\nEcology.\nForests account for 75% of the gross primary productivity of the Earth's biosphere, and contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass. Biomass per unit area is high compared to other vegetation communities. Much of this biomass occurs below ground in the root systems and as partially decomposed plant detritus. The woody component of a forest contains lignin, which is relatively slow to decompose compared with other organic materials such as cellulose or carbohydrate. The world's forests contain about 606 gigatonnes of living biomass (above- and below-ground) and 59 gigatonnes of dead wood. The total biomass has decreased slightly since 1990, but biomass per unit area has increased.\nForest ecosystems broadly differ based on climate; latitudes 10\u00b0 north and south of the equator are mostly covered in tropical rainforest, and the latitudes between 53\u00b0N and 67\u00b0N have boreal forest. As a general rule, forests dominated by angiosperms (\"broadleaf forests\") are more species-rich than those dominated by gymnosperms (\"conifer\", \"montane\", or \"needleleaf forests\"), although exceptions exist. The trees that form the principal structural and defining component of a forest may be of a great variety of species (as in tropical rainforests and temperate deciduous forests), or relatively few species over large areas (e.g., taiga and arid montane coniferous forests). The biodiversity of forests also encompasses shrubs, herbaceous plants, mosses, ferns, lichens, fungi, and a variety of animals.\nTrees rising up to in height add a vertical dimension to the area of land that can support plant and animal species, opening up numerous ecological niches for arboreal animal species, epiphytes, and various species that thrive under the regulated microclimate created under the canopy. Forests have intricate three-dimensional structures that increase in complexity with lower levels of disturbance and greater variety of tree species.\nThe biodiversity of forests varies considerably according to factors such as forest type, geography, climate, and soils \u2013 in addition to human use. Most forest habitats in temperate regions support relatively few animal and plant species, and species that tend to have large geographical distributions, while the montane forests of Africa, South America, Southeast Asia, and lowland forests of Australia, coastal Brazil, the Caribbean islands, Central America, and insular Southeast Asia have many species with small geographical distributions. Areas with dense human populations and intense agricultural land use, such as Europe, parts of Bangladesh, China, India, and North America, are less intact in terms of their biodiversity. Northern Africa, southern Australia, coastal Brazil, Madagascar, and South Africa are also identified as areas with striking losses in biodiversity intactness.\nComponents.\nA forest consists of many components that can be broadly divided into two categories: biotic (living) and abiotic (non-living). The living parts include trees, shrubs, vines, grasses and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants, mosses, algae, fungi, insects, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and microorganisms living on the plants and animals and in the soil, connected by mycorrhizal networks.\nLayers.\nThe main layers of all forest types are the forest floor, the understory, and the canopy. The emergent layer, above the canopy, exists in tropical rainforests. Each layer has a different set of plants and animals, depending upon the availability of sunlight, moisture, and food.\nIn botany and countries like Germany and Poland, a different classification of forest vegetation is often used: tree, shrub, herb, and moss layers (see stratification (vegetation)).\nTypes.\nForests are classified differently and to different degrees of specificity. One such classification is in terms of the biomes in which they exist, combined with leaf longevity of the dominant species (whether they are evergreen or deciduous). Another distinction is whether the forests are composed predominantly of broadleaf trees, coniferous (needle-leaved) trees, or mixed.\nThe number of trees in the world, according to a 2015 estimate, is 3 trillion, of which 1.4 trillion are in the tropics or sub-tropics, 0.6 trillion in the temperate zones, and 0.7 trillion in the coniferous boreal forests. The 2015 estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates, and is based on tree densities measured on over 400,000 plots. It remains subject to a wide margin of error, not least because the samples are mainly from Europe and North America.\nForests can also be classified according to the amount of human alteration. Old-growth forest contains mainly natural patterns of biodiversity in established seral patterns, and they contain mainly species native to the region and habitat. In contrast, secondary forest is forest regrowing following timber harvest and may contain species originally from other regions or habitats.\nDifferent global forest classification systems have been proposed, but none has gained universal acceptance. UNEP-WCMC's forest category classification system is a simplification of other, more complex systems (e.g. UNESCO's forest and woodland 'subformations'). This system divides the world's forests into 26 major types, which reflect climatic zones as well as the principal types of trees. These 26 major types can be reclassified into 6 broader categories: temperate needleleaf, temperate broadleaf and mixed, tropical moist, tropical dry, sparse trees and parkland, and forest plantations. Each category is described in a separate section below.\nTemperate needleleaf.\nTemperate needleleaf forests mostly occupy the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, as well as some warm temperate areas, especially on nutrient-poor or otherwise unfavourable soils. These forests are composed entirely, or nearly so, of coniferous species (Coniferophyta). In the Northern Hemisphere, pines \"Pinus\", spruces \"Picea\", larches \"Larix\", firs \"Abies\", Douglas firs \"Pseudotsuga\", and hemlocks \"Tsuga\" make up the canopy; but other taxa are also important. In the Southern Hemisphere, most coniferous trees (members of Araucariaceae and Podocarpaceae) occur mixed with broadleaf species, and are classed as broadleaf-and-mixed forests.\nTemperate broadleaf and mixed.\nTemperate broadleaf and mixed forests include a substantial component of trees of the Anthophyta group. They are generally characteristic of the warmer temperate latitudes, but extend to cool temperate ones, particularly in the southern hemisphere. They include such forest types as the mixed deciduous forests of the United States and their counterparts in China and Japan; the broadleaf evergreen rainforests of Japan, Chile, and Tasmania; the sclerophyllous forests of Australia, central Chile, the Mediterranean, and California; and the southern beech Nothofagus forests of Chile and New Zealand.\nTropical moist.\nThere are many different types of tropical moist forests, with lowland evergreen broad-leaf tropical rainforests: for example v\u00e1rzea and igap\u00f3 forests and the terra firme forests of the Amazon Basin; the peat swamp forests; dipterocarp forests of Southeast Asia; and the high forests of the Congo Basin. Seasonal tropical forests, perhaps the best description for the colloquial term \"jungle\", typically range from the rainforest zone 10 degrees north or south of the equator, to the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn. Forests located on mountains are also included in this category, divided largely into upper and lower montane formations, on the basis of the variation of physiognomy corresponding to changes in altitude.\nTropical dry.\nTropical dry forests are characteristic of areas in the tropics affected by seasonal drought. The seasonality of rainfall is usually reflected in the deciduousness of the forest canopy, with most trees being leafless for several months of the year. Under some conditions, such as less fertile soils or less predictable drought regimes, the proportion of evergreen species increases and the forests are characterised as \"sclerophyllous\". Thorn forest, a dense forest of low stature with a high frequency of thorny or spiny species, is found where drought is prolonged, and especially where grazing animals are plentiful. On very poor soils, and especially where fire or herbivory are recurrent phenomena, savannas develop.\nSparse trees and savanna.\nSparse trees and savanna are forests with sparse tree-canopy cover. They occur principally in areas of transition from forested to non-forested landscapes. The two major zones in which these ecosystems occur are in the boreal region and in the seasonally dry tropics. At high latitudes, north of the main zone of boreal forestland, growing conditions are not adequate to maintain a continuously closed forest cover, so tree cover is both sparse and discontinuous. This vegetation is variously called open taiga, open lichen woodland, and forest tundra. A savanna is a mixed woodland\u2013grassland ecosystem characterized by the trees being sufficiently widely spaced so that the canopy does not close. The open canopy allows sufficient light to reach the ground to support an unbroken herbaceous layer that consists primarily of grasses. Savannas maintain an open canopy despite a high tree density.\nPlantations.\nForest plantations are generally intended for the production of timber and pulpwood. Commonly mono-specific, planted with even spacing between the trees, and intensively managed, these forests are generally important as habitat for native biodiversity. Some are managed in ways that enhance their biodiversity protection functions and can provide ecosystem services such as nutrient capital maintenance, watershed and soil structure protection and carbon storage.\nArea.\nThe annual net loss of forest area has decreased since 1990, but the world is not on track to meet the target of the United Nations Strategic Plan for Forests to increase forest area by 3 percent by 2030.\nWhile deforestation is taking place in some areas, new forests are being established through natural expansion or deliberate efforts in other areas. As a result, the net loss of forest area is less than the rate of deforestation; and it, too, is decreasing: from per year in the 1990s to per year during 2010\u20132020. In absolute terms, the global forest area decreased by between 1990 and 2020, which is an area about the size of Libya.\nSocietal significance.\nEcosystem services.\nForests provide a diversity of ecosystem services including:\nThe main ecosystem services can be summarized in the next table:\nSome researchers state that forests do not only provide benefits, but can in certain cases also incur costs to humans. Forests may impose an economic burden, diminish the enjoyment of natural areas, reduce the food-producing capacity of grazing land and cultivated land, reduce biodiversity, reduce available water for humans and wildlife, harbour dangerous or destructive wildlife, and act as reservoirs of human and livestock disease.\nAn important consideration regarding carbon sequestration is that forests can turn from a carbon sink to a carbon source if plant diversity, density or forest area decreases, as has been observed in different tropical forests The typical tropical forest may become a carbon source by the 2060s. An assessment of European forests found early signs of carbon sink saturation, after decades of increasing strength. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded that a combination of measures aimed at increasing forest carbon stocks, andsustainable timber offtake will generate the largest carbon sequestration benefit.\nForest-dependent people.\nThe term forest-dependent people is used to describe any of a wide variety of livelihoods that are dependent on access to forests, products harvested from forests, or ecosystem services provided by forests, including those of Indigenous peoples dependent on forests. In India, approximately 22 percent of the population belongs to forest-dependent communities, which live in close proximity to forests and practice agroforestry as a principal part of their livelihood. People of Ghana who rely on timber and bushmeat harvested from forests and Indigenous peoples of the Amazon rainforest are also examples of forest-dependent people. Though forest-dependence by more common definitions is statistically associated with poverty and rural livelihoods, elements of forest-dependence exist in communities with a wide range of characteristics. Generally, richer households derive more cash value from forest resources, whereas among poorer households, forest resources are more important for home consumption and increase community resilience.\nIndigenous peoples.\nForests are fundamental to the culture and livelihood of indigenous people groups that live in and depend on forests, many of which have been removed from and denied access to the lands on which they lived as part of global colonialism. Indigenous lands contain 36% or more of intact forest worldwide, host more biodiversity, and experience less deforestation. Indigenous activists have argued that degradation of forests and indigenous peoples' marginalization and land dispossession are interconnected. Other concerns among indigenous peoples include lack of Indigenous involvement in forest management and loss of knowledge related for the forest ecosystem. Since 2002, the amount of land that is legally owned by or designated for indigenous peoples has broadly increased, but land acquisition in lower-income countries by multinational corporations, often with little or no consultation of indigenous peoples, has also increased. Research in the Amazon rainforest suggests that indigenous methods of agroforestry form reservoirs of biodiversity. In the U.S. state of Wisconsin, forests managed by indigenous people have more plant diversity, fewer invasive species, higher tree regeneration rates, and higher volume of trees.\nManagement.\nForest management has changed considerably over the last few centuries, with rapid changes from the 1980s onward, culminating in a practice now referred to as \"sustainable forest management\". Forest ecologists concentrate on forest patterns and processes, usually with the aim of elucidating cause-and-effect relationships. Foresters who practice sustainable forest management focus on the integration of ecological, social, and economic values, often in consultation with local communities and other stakeholders.\nHumans have generally decreased the amount of forest worldwide. Anthropogenic factors that can affect forests include logging, urban sprawl, human-caused forest fires, acid rain, invasive species, and the slash and burn practices of swidden agriculture or shifting cultivation. The loss and re-growth of forests lead to a distinction between two broad types of forest: primary or old-growth forest and secondary forest. There are also many natural factors that can cause changes in forests over time, including forest fires, insects, diseases, weather, competition between species, etc. In 1997, the World Resources Institute recorded that only 20% of the world's original forests remained in large intact tracts of undisturbed forest. More than 75% of these intact forests lie in three countries: the boreal forests of Russia and Canada, and the rainforest of Brazil.\nAccording to Food and Agriculture Organization's (FAO) \"Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020\", an estimated of forest have been lost worldwide through deforestation since 1990, but the rate of forest loss has declined substantially. In the most recent five-year period (2015\u20132020), the annual rate of deforestation was estimated at , down from annually in 2010\u20132015.\nThe forest transition.\nThe transition of a region from forest loss to net gain in forested land is referred to as the forest transition. This change occurs through a few main pathways, including increase in commercial tree plantations, adoption of agroforestry techniques by small farmers, or spontaneous regeneration when former agricultural land is abandoned. It can be motivated by the economic benefits of forests, the ecosystem services forests provide, or cultural changes where people increasingly appreciate forests for their spiritual, aesthetic, or otherwise intrinsic value. According to the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, to avoid temperature rise by more than 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels, there will need to be an increase in global forest cover equal to the land area of Canada () by 2050.\nChina instituted a ban on logging, beginning in 1998, due to the erosion and flooding that it caused. In addition, ambitious tree-planting programmes in countries such as China, India, the United States, and Vietnam \u2013 combined with natural expansion of forests in some regions \u2013 have added more than of new forests annually. As a result, the net loss of forest area was reduced to per year between 2000 and 2010, down from annually in the 1990s. In 2015, a study for \"Nature Climate Change\" showed that the trend has recently been reversed, leading to an \"overall gain\" in global biomass and forests. This gain is due especially to reforestation in China and Russia. New forests are not equivalent to old growth forests in terms of species diversity, resilience, and carbon capture. On 7 September 2015, the FAO released a new study stating that over the last 25 years the global deforestation rate has decreased by 50% due to improved management of forests and greater government protection.\nThere is an estimated of forest in protected areas worldwide. Of the six major world regions, South America has the highest share of forests in protected areas, at 31 percent. The area of such areas globally has increased by since 1990, but the rate of annual increase slowed in 2010\u20132020.\nSmaller areas of woodland in cities may be managed as urban forestry, sometimes within public parks. These are often created for human benefits; Attention Restoration Theory argues that spending time in nature reduces stress and improves health, while forest schools and kindergartens help young people to develop social as well as scientific skills in forests. These typically need to be close to where the children live.\nCanada.\nCanada has about of forest land. More than 90% of forest land is publicly owned and about 50% of the total forest area is allocated for harvesting. These allocated areas are managed using the principles of sustainable forest management, which include extensive consultation with local stakeholders. About eight percent of Canada's forest is legally protected from resource development. Much more forest land\u2014about 40 percent of the total forest land base\u2014is subject to varying degrees of protection through processes such as integrated land use planning or defined management areas, such as certified forests.\nBy December 2006, over of forest land in Canada (about half the global total) had been certified as being sustainably managed. Clearcutting, first used in the latter half of the 20th century, is less expensive, but devastating to the environment; and companies are required by law to ensure that harvested areas are adequately regenerated. Most Canadian provinces have regulations limiting the size of new clear-cuts, although some older ones grew to over several years.\nThe Canadian Forest Service is the government department which looks after Forests in Canada.\nLatvia.\nLatvia has about of forest land, which equates to about 50.5% of Latvia's total area of of forest land (46% of total forest land) is publicly owned and of forest land (54% of the total) is in private hands. Latvia's forests have been steadily increasing over the years, which is in contrast to many other nations, mostly due to the forestation of land not used for agriculture. In 1935, there were only of forest; today this has increased by more than 150%. Birch is the most common tree at 28.2%, followed by pine (26.9%), spruce (18.3%), grey alder (9.7%), aspen (8.0%), black alder (5.7%), oak/ash (1.2%), with other hardwood trees making up the rest (2.0%).\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, most forests have historically been affected by humans to some degree, though in recent years improved forestry practices have helped regulate or moderate large-scale impacts. The United States Forest Service estimated a net loss of about between 1997 and 2020; this estimate includes conversion of forest land to other uses, including urban and suburban development, as well as afforestation and natural reversion of abandoned crop and pasture land to forest. In many areas of the United States, the area of forest is stable or increasing, particularly in many northern states. The opposite problem from flooding has plagued national forests, with loggers complaining that a lack of thinning and proper forest management has resulted in large forest fires."}
{"id": "11092", "revid": "1278546972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11092", "title": "Finger Lakes", "text": "The Finger Lakes are a group of twelve long, narrow, roughly north\u2013south lakes located directly south of Lake Ontario in an area called the \"Finger Lakes region\" in New York, in the United States. This region straddles the northern and transitional edge of the Northern Allegheny Plateau, known as the Finger Lakes Uplands and Gorges ecoregion, and the Ontario Lowlands ecoregion of the Great Lakes Lowlands.\nThe geological term \"finger lake\" refers to a long, narrow lake in an overdeepened glacial valley, while the proper name \"Finger Lakes\" goes back to the late 19th century. Cayuga and Seneca Lakes are among the deepest in the United States, measuring , respectively, with bottoms well below sea level. Though none of the lakes' widths exceed , Seneca Lake is long, and at is the largest in total area.\nName.\nThe origin of the name \"Finger Lakes\" is uncertain. Currently, the oldest known published use of \"finger lakes\" for this group of 12 lakes is in a United States Geological Survey paper by Thomas Chamberlin that was published in 1883. This paper was later cited and \"Finger Lakes\" formally used as a proper name by R. S. Tarr in a Geological Society of America paper published in 1893. Older usage of \"Finger Lakes\" in either maps, papers, reports, or any other documents remains to be verified.\nLakes.\nThe twelve Finger Lakes, from west to east, are: \nCazenovia Lake to the east, although smaller, is sometimes called \"the 13th Finger Lake\", because it is similar in shape and limnology. It is in Appalachian hill terrain, lying mostly in the historic village of Cazenovia, and is linked to other Finger Lakes by US 20 and NY 13. It may have been formed in the same manner as the Finger Lakes, as satellite photos show three valleys similar in character and spacing to the Finger Lakes east of Otisco Lake. The first is the Tully Valley, which includes a chain of six small lakes called the Tully Lakes at the south end that could collectively be a \"Finger Lake\" that never formed because of a terminal moraine. The moraine caused the Tioughnioga River to flow south instead of north, the opposite of the Finger Lakes' waters. The next two valleys to the east contain Butternut Creek, which flows north, and the East Branch of the Tioughnioga River, which flows south. The next valley contains Limestone Creek, which flows north. Other lakes have also made the claim of being the 13th Finger Lake, including Onondaga lake, although Onondaga, as a dimictic lake, has some significant limnological differences.\nDeRuyter Reservoir, sometimes called Tioughnioga Lake or DeRuyter Lake, a man-made Finger Lake southwest of Cazenovia Lake on Limestone Creek, is 8 miles from the northernmost point on the Finger Lakes Trail, but was built as a feeder reservoir for the Erie Canal. It is maintained by the New York State Canal Corporation.\nOneida Lake, to the northeast of Syracuse, is sometimes included as the \"thumb\", although it is shallow and somewhat different in character from the rest. As with Onondaga and Cazenovia Lakes, it drains into Lake Ontario via the Oswego River and then into the St. Lawrence River ultimately draining into the Atlantic Ocean. Chautauqua Lake, Findley Lake and Kinzua Lake to the west are not considered Finger Lakes; all three drain into the Allegheny River and eventually into the Gulf of Mexico, and in the case of Kinzua and Findley, as with DeRuyter to the east, the lakes are the artificial creation of dams.\nSilver, Conesus, Hemlock, Canadice, Honeoye, and Otisco are considered the minor Finger Lakes. Other smaller lakes, including Waneta and Lamoka lakes, dot this region. They are sometimes called the \"fingernail\" lakes, but are part of the Susquehanna River watershed, draining into a tributary of the Chemung River.\nEast of Oneida and Cazenovia Lakes are the headwaters of the Susquehanna River and Hudson River watersheds (the former in the foothills of the Catskills, the latter through the Mohawk Valley and southern Adirondack Mountains).\nQuaternary geology.\nThese glacial finger lakes originated as a series of northward-flowing streams. Around two million years ago, the area was glaciated by first of many continental glaciers of the Laurentide Ice Sheet moved southward from the Hudson Bay area. During the glacial maximums, subglacial meltwater and glacial ice widened, deepened, and accentuated the existing river valleys to form subglacial tunnel valleys. Glacial debris, possibly terminal moraine left behind by the receding ice, acted as dams, allowing lakes to form. Despite the deep erosion of the valleys, the surrounding uplands show little evidence of glaciation, suggesting the ice was thin, or at least unable to cause much erosion at higher elevations. The deep cutting by glacial erosion left some tributaries hanging high above the lakes\u2014both Seneca and Cayuga have tributaries hanging as much as above the valley floors. Based upon sediments cores, seismic stratigraphy, and radiocarbon dates, the finger lakes became ice-free about 14,400 BP calendar. At this time scouring by ice and meltwater ceased and these lakes filled initially with proglacial lake rhythmites. The deposition of proglacial lake rhythmites occurred between 14,400 and 13,900 BP calendar. After the magins of the Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated into the Ontario lowlands after 13,900 BP calendar, The accumulation, at first, of massive gray clays followed by dark gray to black, laminated, organic-rich muds, accumulated without interruption until present within the Finger Lakes.\nDetailed studies of Marine Isotope Stage 3 and 4 age sediments exposed at a locality called the \"Great Gully\" on the eastern flank of the Cayuga Lake, near Union Springs, New York, record the presence of a paleolake that existed prior to Cayuga Lake. This paleolake, which is called Glacial Lake Nanette, was a proglacial lake that filled the bedrock valley currently occupied by Cayuga Lake from about 50,000 BP calibrated until it was overridden by a glacial readvance that occurred prior to 30,000 BP calendar and buried it beneath younger glacial till. This research shows that bedrock valleys, in which the Finger lakes lie, existed prior to the Last Glacial Maximum and developed over multiple glaciations.\nFinally, although sub-glacial scour during the Last Glacial Maximum removed the majority of pre-existing sediment down to the bedrock bottoms of the Finger Lakes, patches of interglacial deposits are likely preserved locally within or near hanging valleys on the margins of their valleys. For example, the principal site that has been well-studied is the \"Fembank\" exposure of interglacial deposits on the west margin of Cayuga. This deposit provides direct evidence that some version of Cayuga Lake and its bedrock valley existed prior to Last Glacial Maximum.\nEcological concerns.\nMuch of the Finger Lakes area lies upon the Marcellus Shale and the Utica Shale, two prominent natural gas reserves. Due to the recent increase in fracking technology, the natural gas is now accessible for extraction. While some large landowners have leased their lands, and a number of small landowners would like to follow suit, many residents of the Finger Lakes oppose the fracking process due to concerns about groundwater contamination and the industrial impact of the extraction-related activities. The first direct actions and local legislative actions against fracking occurred in the Finger Lakes bioregion. In December 2014, the government of New York banned all fracking in the state, citing pollution risks.\nTrash from New York City is also sent to landfills in the area.\nSince 2017, all of the Finger Lakes have experienced at least one outbreak of toxic algae, and for most of the lakes it has become an annual occurrence.\nHistory.\nThe Finger Lakes region is a central part of the Iroquois homeland. The Iroquois tribes include the Seneca and Cayuga nations, for which the two largest Finger Lakes are named. The Tuscarora tribe lived in the Finger Lakes region as well, from ca. 1720. The Onondaga and Oneida tribes lived at the eastern edge of the region, closer to their namesake lakes, Oneida Lake and Onondaga Lake. The easternmost Iroquois tribe was the Mohawk.\nThe Finger Lakes region contains sites of unknown cultural affiliation and age. The Bluff Point Stoneworks is one such site as its age and who may have constructed these enigmatic stone structures has not been determined.\nDuring colonial times, many other tribes moved to the Finger Lakes region, seeking the protection of the Iroquois. For example, in 1753, remnants of several Virginia Siouan tribes, collectively called the Tutelo-Saponi, moved to the town of Coreorgonel at the south end of Cayuga Lake near present-day Ithaca and lived there until 1779, when their village was destroyed by the Sullivan Expedition.\nIroquois towns in the Finger Lakes region included the Seneca town of Gen-nis-he-yo (present-day Geneseo), Kanadaseaga (Seneca Castle, near present-day Geneva), Goiogouen (Cayuga Castle, east of Cayuga Lake), Chonodote (Cayuga town, present-day Aurora), Catherine's Town (near present-day Watkins Glen) and Ganondagan State Historic Site in Victor, New York.\nAs one of the most powerful Indian nations during colonial times, the Iroquois were able to prevent European colonization of the Finger Lakes region for nearly two centuries after first contact, often playing the French off against the British interests in savvy demonstrations of political competence. The renowned ingenuity and adaptability of the Iroquois people were key tools of resistance against hostile European powers rapidly spreading throughout North America, eager to dominate and increasingly brutal toward Native Americans in the Finger Lakes and beyond.\nBy the late 18th century, with the French governmental influence gone from Canada, Iroquois power had weakened relative to the steady growth in European-Americans' populations, and internal strife eroded the political unity of the Iroquois Confederacy as it faced pressures from colonists itching to move west and a desire to keep them out of Amerindian lands. During the American Revolutionary War, some Iroquois sided with the British and some with the Americans, resulting in civil war among the Iroquois. In the late 1770s, British-allied Iroquois attacked various American frontier settlements, prompting counter-attacks, culminating in the Sullivan Expedition of 1779, which destroyed most of the Iroquois towns and effectively broke Iroquois power. After the Revolutionary War, the Iroquois and other Indians of the region were assigned reservations. Most of their land, including the Finger Lakes region, was opened up to purchase and settlement.\nRoughly the western half of the Finger Lakes region comprised the Phelps and Gorham Purchase of 1790. The region was rapidly settled at the turn of the 19th century, largely by a westward migration from New England, and to a lesser degree by northward influx from Pennsylvania. The regional architecture reflects these area traditions of the Federal and Greek Revival periods.\nNotable places.\nThe Finger Lakes region, together with the Genesee Country of Western New York, has been referred to as the burned-over district. There, in the 19th century, the Second Great Awakening was a revival of Christianity; some new religions were also formed.\nThe region was active in reform and utopian movements. Many of its Underground Railroad sites have been documented. For example, the Harriet Tubman Home at Auburn recalls the life and work of the African-American \"Moses of her people.\"\nOn the northern end of the Finger Lakes are also Seneca Falls, the birthplace of the women's suffrage movement; Waterloo, the birthplace of Memorial Day; and Palmyra, the birthplace of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. An annual outdoor drama, The \"Hill Cumorah Pageant\", produced by the church, draws thousands of visitors each year.\nHammondsport was the home of aviation pioneer Glenn Curtiss, and favorable air currents make the area a popular spot for glider pilots. Elmira, just to the south, was the home of Mark Twain in his later life, and the site of an infamous Civil War prison. Corning is most noted as the home of Corning Glass Works and the Corning Museum of Glass. Hornell, just southwest of the Finger Lakes, was a major railroad center; locomotives were repaired there for many years and rail passenger cars are built there today (2022).\nConesus remains the home of the oldest producer of pure grape sacramental wine in the Western hemisphere.\nNotable among the historic buildings of the region (most linked below) is the Granger Homestead (1816), a large village house in Federal Style at Canandaigua, New York. Another example of the Federal Style is the Prouty-Chew House (1829) at Geneva, portions of which were altered at various times in new fashions.\nThree Greek Revival mansions are situated near three lakes: The Richard DeZeng House, Skaneateles (1839); Rose Hill, Geneva (1839); and Esperanza, Penn Yan (1838). The latter two are open to the public.\nThe Seward House in Auburn, a National Historic Landmark, is a mansion more characteristic of the Civil War era, virtually unchanged from the nineteenth century. Belhurst Castle, Geneva, a stone mansion in the Romanesque Revival style, now serves as an inn. Sonnenberg mansion at Canandaigua is a later nineteenth-century residence in the Queen Anne style, known for its restored period gardens. Geneva on the Lake is a villa (1910\u201314) that recalls those on Italian lakes. Now an inn, it has European-style gardens. Many buildings and historic districts of the Finger Lakes region are notable, in addition to these historic houses.\nImplemented in August, 2010, the Hemlock-Canadice State Forest covers that encompass the two western Finger Lakes, Hemlock and Canadice. These lakes have provided drinking water for the City of Rochester for more than 100 years. To protect water quality, the city acquired much of the property around the lakes. Over the decades, the land reforested, but a few traces of its past, such as stone walls or cottage foundations, remain. Today these two lakes, with their steep, forested, largely-undeveloped shorelines and deep, clear water, provide visitors a glimpse of the Finger Lakes of the past. The Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) manages this State Forest for compatible public access for recreation, including fishing, hunting, nature study, boating and hiking. Activities in Hemlock-Canadice State Forest are subject the DEC's Rules and Regulations for the Use of State Lands, 6 NYCRR Part 190, as well as any other applicable state statutes, rules and regulations. These are sensitive areas because they protect public drinking water.\nThe Finger Lakes Trail and its branch trails run through the southern portion of the Finger Lakes region and also constitute a portion of the 4,600 mile North Country National Scenic Trail.\nHemlock Lake is home to the state's oldest nesting bald eagle site, dating back to the early 1960s. The nesting bald eagles of Hemlock Lake have fostered a resurgence of bald eagles throughout New York State. Hemlock Lake, originally known as \"O-Neh-Da\" which is Seneca for \"Lake of Hemlock Trees\", is home to the nation's oldest sacramental winery, founded by Bishop McQuaid in 1872. Today, O-Neh-Da Vineyard continues to make premium natural pure grape wine for churches and foodies alike.\nWine.\nThe Finger Lakes region is New York's largest wine-producing region. Over 400 wineries and vineyards surround Seneca, Cayuga, Canandaigua, Keuka, Conesus, and Hemlock Lakes. Because of the lakes' great depth, they provide a lake effect to the lush vineyards that flank their shores. Due to the size and concentration of these lakes, the region retains residual summer warmth in the winter and winter's cold in the spring; as a result, the grapes are protected from disastrous spring frost during shoot growth, and early frost before the harvest. Additionally, due to the long, narrow, north-to-south positioning of the Finger Lakes, the slopes on the east and west side provide for variations in sunlight exposure, temperature, soil, and more; this leads to a great diversity of growing environments within the region and ultimately in the yielded wine.\nThe main grape varieties grown are Chardonnay, Riesling, Gew\u00fcrztraminer, Pinot noir, Cabernet Franc, Vidal blanc, Seyval blanc and many \"Vitis labrusca\" (American native) varieties or cultivars.\nWith the passage of the Farm Winery Act in 1976, numerous wineries are now open to visitors. Wineries are a growth industry of the region, contributing through their production and by attracting visitors. The Finger Lakes American Viticulture Area (AVA) includes two of America's oldest wineries, O-Neh-Da Vineyard (1872) on Hemlock Lake and The Pleasant Valley Wine Company (1860) on Keuka Lake.\nCraft beer.\nAside from wine, the Finger Lakes' craft beer industry has grown significantly in recent years. In 2018 the region was home to the second-highest number of breweries in New York after the Hudson Valley.\nEducational institutions.\nThe area is also known for higher-education learning. The largest is Ivy League institution Cornell University, in Ithaca. Other notable schools are Ithaca College, also in Ithaca; Syracuse University, SUNY Upstate Medical University, State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, and Le Moyne College, in Syracuse; SUNY Cortland, in Cortland; Tompkins Cortland Community College in Dryden, Ithaca, and Cortland; Wells College in Aurora; Hobart and William Smith Colleges in Geneva; Keuka College in Keuka Park; Finger Lakes Community College in Canandaigua and Geneva; New York Chiropractic College in Seneca Falls and Cayuga Community College in Auburn.\nNearby the Finger Lakes is Binghamton University (SUNY), the University of Rochester, Nazareth College, St. John Fisher University, Roberts Wesleyan College, Monroe Community College, and Rochester Institute of Technology in Rochester; Elmira College in Elmira; Corning Community College in Corning; and the State University of New York at Geneseo.\nMuseums.\nThe Finger Lakes region is home to several museums. These include the Corning Museum of Glass, the Johnson Museum of Art at Cornell University, the Strong National Museum of Play, the Glenn H. Curtiss Museum, the Finger Lakes Boating Museum, the Wings of Eagles Discovery Center, the Sciencenter, the Museum of the Earth, the National Soaring Museum, the Rockwell Museum, the Seward House Museum, the William H. Seward and the Samuel Warren Homesteads of the New York Historical Society, birthplace of New York State's first successful commercial winery.\nThe Women's Rights National Historic Park is in Seneca Falls. The park includes the home of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and the Wesleyan Chapel, where she held the first convention on women's rights in 1848."}
{"id": "11097", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11097", "title": "Frisian language/vocabulary", "text": ""}
{"id": "11098", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11098", "title": "Frisian language/history", "text": ""}
{"id": "11100", "revid": "25954311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11100", "title": "Kite", "text": " \nA kite is a tethered heavier-than-air or lighter-than-air craft with wing surfaces that react against the air to create lift and drag forces. A kite consists of wings, tethers and anchors. Kites often have a bridle and tail to guide the face of the kite so the wind can lift it. Some kite designs do not need a bridle; box kites can have a single attachment point. A kite may have fixed or moving anchors that can balance the kite. The name is derived from the kite, the hovering bird of prey.\nThere are several shapes of kites. \nThe lift that sustains the kite in flight is generated when air moves around the kite's surface, producing low pressure above and high pressure below the wings. The interaction with the wind also generates horizontal drag along the direction of the wind. The resultant force vector from the lift and drag force components is opposed by the tension of one or more of the lines or tethers to which the kite is attached. The anchor point of the kite line may be static or moving (e.g., the towing of a kite by a running person, boat, free-falling anchors as in paragliders and fugitive parakites or vehicle).\nThe same principles of fluid flow apply in liquids, so kites can be used in underwater currents. Paravanes and otter boards operate underwater on an analogous principle.\nMan-lifting kites were made for reconnaissance, entertainment and during development of the first practical aircraft, the biplane.\nKites have a long and varied history and many different types are flown individually and at festivals worldwide. Kites may be flown for recreation, art or other practical uses. Sport kites can be flown in aerial ballet, sometimes as part of a competition. Power kites are multi-line steerable kites designed to generate large forces which can be used to power activities such as kite surfing, kite landboarding, kite buggying and snow kiting.\nHistory.\nIn China, the kite has been claimed as the invention of the 5th-century BC Chinese philosophers Mozi (also Mo Di, or Mo Ti) and Lu Ban (also Gongshu Ban, or Kungshu Phan). Materials ideal for kite building were readily available including silk fabric for sail material; fine, high-tensile-strength silk for flying line; and resilient bamboo for a strong, lightweight framework. By 549 AD, paper kites were certainly being flown, as it was recorded that in that year a paper kite was used as a message for a rescue mission. Ancient and medieval Chinese sources describe kites being used for measuring distances, testing the wind, lifting men, signaling, and communication for military operations. The earliest known Chinese kites were flat (not bowed) and often rectangular. Later, tailless kites incorporated a stabilizing bowline. Kites were decorated with mythological motifs and legendary figures; some were fitted with strings and whistles to make musical sounds while flying.\nAfter its introduction into India, the kite further evolved into the fighter kite, known as the patang in India, where thousands are flown every year on festivals such as Makar Sankranti.\nKites were known throughout Polynesia, as far as New Zealand, with the assumption being that the knowledge diffused from China along with the people. Anthropomorphic kites made from cloth and wood were used in religious ceremonies to send prayers to the gods. Polynesian kite traditions are used by anthropologists to get an idea of early \"primitive\" Asian traditions that are believed to have at one time existed in Asia.\nKites were late to arrive in Europe, although windsock-like banners were known and used by the Romans. Stories of kites were first brought to Europe by Marco Polo towards the end of the 13th century, and kites were brought back by sailors from Japan and Malaysia in the 16th and 17th centuries. Konrad Kyeser described dragon kites in \"Bellifortis\" about 1400 AD. Although kites were initially regarded as mere curiosities, by the 18th and 19th centuries they were being used as vehicles for scientific research.\nIn 1752, Benjamin Franklin published an account of a kite experiment to prove that lightning was caused by electricity.\nKites were also instrumental in the research of the Wright brothers, and others, as they developed the first airplane in the late 1800s. Several different designs of man-lifting kites were developed. The period from 1860 to about 1910 became the European \"golden age of kiting\".\nIn the 20th century, many new kite designs are developed. These included Eddy's tailless diamond, the tetrahedral kite, the Rogallo wing, the sled kite, the parafoil, and power kites. Kites were used for scientific purposes, especially in meteorology, aeronautics, wireless communications and photography. The Rogallo wing was adapted for stunt kites and hang gliding and the parafoil was adapted for parachuting and paragliding.\nThe rapid development of mechanically powered aircraft diminished interest in kites. World War II saw a limited use of kites for military purposes (survival radio, Focke Achgelis Fa 330, military radio antenna kites).\nKites are now mostly used for recreation. Lightweight synthetic materials (ripstop nylon, plastic film, carbon fiber tube and rod) are used for kite making. Synthetic rope and cord (nylon, polyethylene, kevlar and dyneema) are used as bridle and kite line.\nMaterials.\nDesigns often emulate flying insects, birds, and other beasts, both real and mythical. The finest Chinese kites are made from split bamboo (usually golden bamboo), covered with silk, and hand painted. On larger kites, clever hinges and latches allow the kite to be disassembled and compactly folded for storage or transport. Cheaper mass-produced kites are often made from printed polyester rather than silk.\nTails are used for some single-line kite designs to keep the kite's nose pointing into the wind. Spinners and spinsocks can be attached to the flying line for visual effect. There are rotating wind socks which spin like a turbine. On large display kites these tails, spinners and spinsocks can be long or more.\nModern aerobatic kites use two or four lines to allow fine control of the kite's angle to the wind. Traction kites may have an additional line to de-power the kite and quick-release mechanisms to disengage flyer and kite in an emergency.\nPractical uses.\nKites have been used for human flight, military applications, science and meteorology, photography, lifting radio antennas, generating power, aerodynamics experiments, and much more.\nMilitary applications.\nKites have been used for military purposes in the past, such as signaling, delivery of ammunition, and for observation, both by lifting an observer above the field of battle and by using kite aerial photography.\nKites were first used in warfare by the Chinese. During the Song dynasty the \"Fire Crow\", a kite carrying incendiary powder, a fuse, and a burning stick of incense was developed as a weapon.\nAccording to \"Samguk Sagi\", in 647 Kim Yu-sin, a Korean general of Silla rallied his troops to defeat rebels by using flaming kites which also frightened the enemy.\nRussian chronicles mention Prince Oleg of Novgorod use of kites during the siege of Constantinople in 906: \"and he crafted horses and men of paper, armed and gilded, and lifted them into the air over the city; the Greeks saw them and feared them\".\nWalter de Milemete's 1326 \"De nobilitatibus, sapientiis, et prudentiis regum\" treatise depicts a group of knights flying kite laden with a black-powder filled firebomb over the wall of city.\nKites were also used by Admiral Yi of the Joseon Dynasty (13921910) of Korea. During the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592\u20131598), Admiral Yi commanded his navy using kites. His kites had specific markings directing his fleet to perform various orders.\nIn the modern era the British Army used kites to haul human lookouts into the air for observation purposes, using the kites developed by Samuel Franklin Cody. Barrage kites were used to protect shipping during the Second World War. Kites were also used for anti-aircraft target practice.\nKites and kytoons were used for lofting communications antenna. Submarines lofted observers in rotary kites.\nPalestinians from the Gaza Strip have flown firebomb kites over the Israel\u2013Gaza barrier, setting fires on the Israeli side of the border, hundreds of dunams of Israeli crop fields were burned by firebomb kites launched from Gaza, with an estimated economic loss of several millions of shekels.\nScience and meteorology.\nKites have been used for scientific purposes, such as Benjamin Franklin's famous experiment proving that lightning is electricity. Kites were the precursors to the traditional aircraft, and were instrumental in the development of early flying craft. Alexander Graham Bell experimented with very large man-lifting kites, as did the Wright brothers and Lawrence Hargrave. Kites had a historical role in lifting scientific instruments to measure atmospheric conditions for weather forecasting. Francis Ronalds and William Radcliffe Birt described a very stable kite at Kew Observatory as early as 1847 that was trialled for the purpose of supporting self-registering meteorological instruments at height.\nRadio aerials and light beacons.\nKites can be used for radio purposes, by kites carrying antennas for MF, LF or VLF-transmitters. This method was used for the reception station of the first transatlantic transmission by Marconi. Captive balloons may be more convenient for such experiments, because kite-carried antennas require a lot of wind, which may be not always possible with heavy equipment and a ground conductor. It must be taken into account during experiments, that a conductor carried by a kite can lead to high voltage toward ground, which can endanger people and equipment, if suitable precautions (grounding through resistors or a parallel resonant circuit tuned to transmission frequency) are not taken.\nKites can be used to carry light effects such as lightsticks or battery powered lights.\nKite traction.\nKites can be used to pull people and vehicles downwind. Efficient foil-type kites such as power kites can also be used to sail upwind under the same principles as used by other sailing craft, provided that lateral forces on the ground or in the water are redirected as with the keels, center boards, wheels and ice blades of traditional sailing craft. In the last two decades several kite sailing sports have become popular, such as kite buggying, kite land boarding, kite boating and kite surfing. Snow kiting has also become popular in recent years.\nKite sailing opens several possibilities not available in traditional sailing:\nElectricity generation.\nComputer-controlled kites can serve as a method of electricity generation when windmills are impractical. Several companies have introduced self-contained crates and shipping containers that provide an alternative to gas-powered generators for remote locations. Such systems use a combination of autonomous, self-launching kites for generation and batteries to store excess power for when winds are low or when otherwise draw exceeds supply. Some designs are tethered to long lines to reach high altitude winds which are always present, even when ground level winds are unavailable or insufficient.\nUnderwater kites.\nUnderwater kites are now being developed to harvest renewable power from the flow of water.\nCultural uses.\nKite festivals are a popular form of entertainment throughout the world. They include large local events, traditional festivals which have been held for hundreds of years and major international festivals which bring in kite flyers from other countries to display their unique art kites and demonstrate the latest technical kites.\nMany countries have kite museums. These museums may have a focus on historical kites, preserving the country's kite traditions.\nAsia.\nKite flying is popular in many Asian countries, where it often takes the form of \"kite fighting\", in which participants try to snag each other's kites or cut other kites down. Fighter kites are usually small, flattened diamond-shaped kites made of paper and bamboo. Tails are not used on fighter kites so that agility and maneuverability are not compromised.In Afghanistan, kite flying is a popular game, and is known in Dari as \"Gudiparan Bazi\". Some kite fighters pass their strings through a mixture of ground glass powder and glue, which is legal. The resulting strings are very abrasive and can sever the competitor's strings more easily. The abrasive strings can also injure people. During the Taliban rule in Afghanistan, kite flying was banned, among various other recreations.\nIn Pakistan, kite flying is often known as Gudi-Bazi or Patang-bazi. Although kite flying is a popular ritual for the celebration of spring festival known as Jashn-e-Baharaan (lit. Spring Festival) or Basant, kites are flown throughout the year. Kite fighting is a very popular pastime all around Pakistan, but mostly in urban centers across the country (especially Lahore). The kite fights are at their highest during the spring celebrations and the fighters enjoy competing with rivals to cut-loose the string of the others kite, popularly known as \"Paecha\". During the spring festival, kite flying competitions are held across the country and the skies are colored with kites. When a competitor succeeds in cutting another's kite loose, shouts of 'wo kata' ring through the air. Cut kites are reclaimed by chasing after them. This is a popular ritual, especially among the country's youth, and is depicted in the 2007 film \"The Kite Runner\" (although that story is based in neighboring Afghanistan). Kites and strings are a big business in the country and several different types of string are used, including glass-coated, metal, and tandi. Kite flying was banned in Punjab, India due to more than one motorcyclist death caused by glass-coated or metal kite strings. Kup, Patang, Guda, and Nakhlaoo are some of the popular kite brands; they vary in balance, weight and speed.\nIn Indonesia kites are flown as both sport and recreation. One of the most popular kite variants is from Bali. Balinese kites are unique and they have different designs and forms; birds, butterflies, dragons, ships, etc. In Vietnam, kites are flown without tails. Instead small flutes are attached allowing the wind to \"hum\" a musical tune. There are other forms of sound-making kites. In Bali, large bows are attached to the front of the kites to make a deep throbbing vibration, and in Malaysia, a row of gourds with sound-slots are used to create a whistle as the kite flies. Malaysia is also home to the Kite Museum in Malacca.\nKite are also popular in Nepal, especially in hilly areas and among the Pahadi and Newar communities, although people also fly kites in Terai areas. Unlike India, people in Nepal fly kites in August \u2013 September period and is more popular in time of Dashain.\nKites are very popular in India, with the states of Gujarat, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana and Punjab notable for their kite fighting festivals. Highly maneuverable single-string paper and bamboo kites are flown from the rooftops while using line friction in an attempt to cut each other's kite lines, either by letting the cutting line loose at high speed or by pulling the line in a fast and repeated manner. During the Indian spring festival of Makar Sankranti, near the middle of January, millions of people fly kites all over northern India. Kite flying in Hyderabad starts a month before this, but kite flying/fighting is an important part of other celebrations, including Republic Day, Independence Day, Raksha Bandhan, Viswakarma Puja day in late September and Janmashtami. An international kite festival is held every year before Uttarayan for three days in Vadodara, Surat and Ahmedabad.\nKites have been flown in China since ancient times. Weifang is home to the largest kite museum in the world. It also hosts an annual international kite festival on the large salt flats south of the city. There are several kite museums in Japan, UK, Malaysia, Indonesia, Taiwan, Thailand and the USA. In the pre-modern period, Malays in Singapore used kites for fishing.\nIn Japan, kite flying is traditionally a children's play in New Year holidays and in the Boys' Festival in May. In some areas, there is a tradition to celebrate a new boy baby with a new kite (\u795d\u3044\u51e7). There are many kite festivals throughout Japan. The most famous one is \"Y\u014dkaichi Giant Kite Festival\" in Higashi\u014dmi, Shiga, which started in 1841. The largest kite ever built in the festival is wide by high and weighs . In the Hamamatsu Kite Festival in Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, more than 100 kites are flown in the sky over the Nakatajima Sand Dunes, one of the three largest sand dunes in Japan, which overlooks the Enshunada Sea. Parents who have a new baby prepare a new kite with their baby's name and fly it in the festival. These kites are traditional ones made from bamboo and paper.\nEurope.\nIn Greece and Cyprus, flying kites is a tradition for Clean Monday, the first day of Lent. In the British Overseas Territory of Bermuda, traditional Bermuda kites are made and flown at Easter, to symbolise Christ's ascent. In Fuerteventura a kite festival is usually held on the weekend nearest to 8 November lasting for 3 days.\nPolynesia.\nPolynesian traditional kites are sometimes used at ceremonies and variants of traditional kites for amusement. Older pieces are kept in museums. These are treasured by the people of Polynesia.\nSouth America.\nIn Brazil, flying a kite is a very popular leisure activity for children, teenagers and even young adults. Mostly these are boys, and it is overwhelmingly kite fighting a game whose goal is to maneuver their own kites to cut the other persons' kites' strings during flight, and followed by kite running where participants race through the streets to take the free-drifting kites. As in other countries with similar traditions, injuries are common and motorcyclists in particular need to take precautions.\nIn Chile, kites are very popular, especially during Independence Day festivities (September 18).\nIn Peru, kites are also very popular. There are kite festivals in parks and beaches mostly on August.\nIn Colombia, kites can be seen flown in parks and recreation areas during August which is calles as windy. It is during this month that most people, especially the young ones would fly kites.\nIn Guyana, kites are flown at Easter, an activity in which all ethnic and religious groups participate. Kites are generally not flown at any other time of year. Kites start appearing in the sky in the weeks leading up to Easter and school children are taken to parks for the activity. It all culminates in a massive airborne celebration on Easter Monday especially in Georgetown, the capital, and other coastal areas. The history of the practice is not entirely clear but given that Easter is a Christian festival, it is said that kite flying is symbolic of the Risen Lord. Moore describes the phenomenon in the 19th century as follows:\nThe exact origins of the practice of kite flying (exclusively) at Easter are unclear. Bridget Brereton and Kevin Yelvington speculate that kite flying was introduced by Chinese indentured immigrants to the then colony of British Guiana in the mid 19th century. The author of an article in the \"Guyana Chronicle\" newspaper of May 6, 2007 is more certain:\nWorld records.\nThere are many world records involving kites. The world's largest kites are inflatable single-line kites. The world record for the largest kite flown for at least 20 minutes is \"The Flag of Kuwait\". \nThe world record for most kites flown simultaneously was achieved in 2011 when 12,350 kites were flown by children on Al-Waha beach in Gaza Strip. \nThe single-kite altitude record is held by a triangular-box delta kite. On 23 September 2014 a team led by Robert Moore, flew a kite to above ground level. The record altitude was reached after eight series of attempts over a ten-year period from a remote location in western New South Wales, Australia. The tall and wide Dunton-Taylor delta kite's flight was controlled by a winch system using of ultra high strength Dyneema line. The flight took about eight hours from ground and return. The height was measured with on-board GPS telemetry transmitting positional data in real time to a ground-based computer and also back-up GPS data loggers for later analysis.\nGeneral safety issues.\nThere are safety issues involved in kite-flying. Kite lines can strike and tangle on electrical power lines, causing power blackouts and running the risk of electrocuting the kite flier. Wet kite lines or wire can act as a conductor for static electricity and lightning when the weather is stormy. Kites with large surface area or powerful lift can lift kite fliers off the ground or drag them into other objects. In urban areas there is usually a ceiling on how high a kite can be flown, to prevent the kite and line infringing on the airspace of helicopters and light aircraft. It is also possible for fighter kites to kill people, as happened in India when three spectators were killed in separate incidents during Independence Day, August, 2016\u2014precipitating a ban on certain types of enhanced line.\nThe government of Egypt banned kite-flying in July 2020, seizing 369 kites in Cairo and 99 in Alexandria, citing both safety and national security concerns."}
{"id": "11101", "revid": "3689137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11101", "title": "Fanzine", "text": "A fanzine (blend of \"fan\" and \"magazine\" or \"-zine\") is a non-professional and non-official publication produced by enthusiasts of a particular cultural phenomenon (such as a literary or musical genre) for the pleasure of others who share their interest. The term was coined in an October 1940 science fiction fanzine by Russ Chauvenet and first popularized within science fiction fandom, and from there the term was adopted by other communities.\nTypically, publishers, editors, writers and other contributors of articles or illustrations to fanzines are not paid. Fanzines are traditionally circulated free of charge, or for a nominal cost to defray postage or production expenses. Copies are often offered in exchange for similar publications, or for contributions of art, articles, or letters of comment (LoCs), which are then published.\nSome fanzines are typed and photocopied by amateurs using standard home office equipment. A few fanzines have developed into professional publications (sometimes known as \"prozines\"), and many professional writers were first published in fanzines; some continue to contribute to them after establishing a professional reputation. The term fanzine is sometimes confused with \"fan magazine\", but the latter term most often refers to commercially produced publications \"for\" (rather than \"by\") fans.\nOrigin.\nThe origins of amateur fanac \"fan\" publications are obscure, but can be traced at least back to 19th century literary groups in the United States which formed amateur press associations to publish collections of amateur fiction, poetry, and commentary, such as H. P. Lovecraft's \"United Amateur\".\nAs professional printing technology progressed, so did the technology of fanzines. Early fanzines were hand-drafted or typed on a manual typewriter and printed using primitive reproduction techniques (e.g., the spirit duplicator or even the hectograph). Only a very small number of copies could be made at a time, so circulation was extremely limited. The use of mimeograph machines enabled greater press runs, and the photocopier increased the speed and ease of publishing once more. Today, thanks to the advent of desktop publishing and self-publication, there is often little difference between the appearance of a fanzine and a professional magazine.\nGenres.\nScience fiction.\nWhen Hugo Gernsback published the first science fiction magazine, \"Amazing Stories\" in 1926, he allowed for a large letter column which printed reader's addresses. By 1927 readers, often young adults, would write to each other, bypassing the magazine. Science fiction fanzines had their beginnings in Serious &amp; Constructive (later shortened to sercon) correspondence. The fans would start up clubs to ease finding others with their same interests. Gernsback founded the Science Fiction League in 1934, where these clubs could advertise for more users.\nThe first science fiction fanzine, \"The Comet\", was published in 1930 by the Science Correspondence Club in Chicago and edited by Raymond A. Palmer and Walter Dennis. The term \"fanzine\" was coined by Russ Chauvenet in the October 1940 edition of his fanzine \"Detours\". \"Fanzines\" were distinguished from \"prozines\" (a term Chauvenet also invented), that is, all professional magazines. Prior to that, the fan publications were known as \"fanmags\".\nScience fiction fanzines used a variety of printing methods. Typewriters, school dittos, church mimeos and (if they could afford it) multi-color letterpress or other mid-to-high level printing. Some fans wanted their news spread, others reveled in the artistry and beauty of fine printing. The hectograph, introduced around 1876, was so named because it could produce (in theory) up to a hundred copies. Hecto used an aniline dye, transferred to a tray of gelatin, and paper would be placed on the gel, one sheet at a time, for transfer. Messy and smelly, the process could create vibrant colors for the few copies produced, the easiest aniline dye to make being purple (technically indigo). The next small but significant technological step after hectography is the spirit duplicator, essentially the hectography process using a drum instead of the gelatin. Introduced by Ditto Corporation in 1923, these machines were known for the next six decades as Ditto Machines and used by fans because they were cheap to use and could (with a little effort) print in color.\nThe mimeograph machine, which forced ink through a wax paper stencil cut by the keys of a typewriter, was the standard for many decades. A second-hand mimeo could print hundreds of copies and (with more than a little effort) print in color. The electronic stencil cutter (shortened to \"electrostencil\" by most) could add photographs and illustrations to a mimeo stencil. A mimeo'd zine could look terrible or look beautiful, depending more on the skill of the mimeo operator than the quality of the equipment. Only a few fans could afford more professional printers, or the time it took them to print, until photocopying became cheap and ubiquitous in the 1970s. With the advent of computer printers and desktop publishing in the 1980s, fanzines began to look far more professional. The rise of the internet made correspondence cheaper and \"much\" faster, and the World Wide Web has made publishing a fanzine as simple as coding a web page.\nNew technology brought various print style innovations. For example, there were alphanumeric contractions which are actually precursors to \"leetspeak' (a well-known example is the \"initials\" used by Forrest J. Ackerman in his fanzines from the 1930s and 1940s, namely \"4sj\". Fans around the world knew Ackerman by three letters \"4sj\" or even two: \"4e\" for \"Forry\"). Fanspeak is rich with abbreviations and concatenations. Where teenagers labored to save typing on ditto masters, they now save keystrokes when text messaging. Ackerman invented nonstoparagraphing as a space-saving measure. When the typist comes to the end of a paragraph, they simply moved the platen down one line.\nNever commercial enterprises, most science fiction fanzines were (and many still are) available for \"the usual\", a sample issue will be mailed on request. To receive further issues, a reader sends a \"letter of comment\" (LoC) about the fanzine to the editor. The LoC might be published in the next issue; some fanzines consisted almost exclusively of letter columns, where discussions were conducted in much the same way as they are in internet newsgroups and mailing lists today, though at a relatively glacial pace. Often fanzine editors (\"faneds\") would simply swap issues with each other, not worrying too much about matching trade for trade, somewhat like being on one another's friends list. Without being closely connected with the rest of fandom, a budding faned could read fanzine reviews in prozines, and fanzines reviewed other fanzines. Recent technology has changed the speed of communication between fans and the technology available, but the basic concepts developed by science fiction fanzines in the 1930s can be seen online today. Blogs\u2014with their threaded comments, personalized illustrations, shorthand in-jokes, wide variety in quality and wider variety of content\u2014follow the structure developed in science fiction fanzines, without (usually) realizing the antecedent.\nSince 1937, science fiction fans have formed amateur press associations (APAs); the members contribute to a collective assemblage or bundle that contains contributions from all of them, called apazines and often containing mailing comments. Some APAs are still active, and some are published as virtual \"e-zines\", distributed on the Internet. Specific Hugo Awards are given for fanzines, fan writing and fanart.\nMedia.\nMedia fanzines were originally merely a subgenre of SF fanzines, written by science fiction fans already familiar with apazines. The first media fanzine was a \"Star Trek\" fan publication called \"Spockanalia\", published in September 1967 by members of the Lunarians. They hoped that fanzines such as \"Spockanalia\" would be recognized by the broader science-fiction fan community in traditional ways, such as a Hugo Award for Best Fanzine. All five of its issues were published while the show was still on the air, and included letters from D. C. Fontana, Gene Roddenberry, and most of the cast members, and an article by future Hugo and Nebula winner Lois McMaster Bujold.\nMany other Star Trek 'zines followed, then slowly zines appeared for other media sources, such as \"Starsky and Hutch\", \"Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" and \"Blake's 7\". By the mid-1970s, there were enough media zines being published that adzines existed just to advertise all of the other zines available. Although \"Spockanalia\" had a mix of stories and essays, most zines were all fiction. Like SF fanzines, these media zines spanned the gamut of publishing quality from digest-sized mimeos to offset printed masterpieces with four-color covers.\nMen wrote and edited most previous science fiction fanzines, which typically published articles reporting on trips to conventions, and reviews of books and other fanzines. Camille Bacon-Smith later stated that \"One thing you almost never find in a science fiction fanzine is science fiction. Rather ... fanzines were the social glue that created a community out of a worldwide scattering of readers.\" Women published most media fanzines, which by contrast also included fan fiction. By doing so, they \"fill the need of a mostly female audience for fictional narratives that expand the boundary of the official source products offered on the television and movie screen.\" In addition to long and short stories, as well as poetry, many media fanzines included illustrated stories, as well as stand alone art, often featuring portraits of the show or film's principal characters. The art could range from simple sketches, to reproductions of large elaborate works painted in oil or acrylic, though most are created in ink.\nIn the late 1970s, fiction that included a sexual relationship between two of the male characters of the media source (first Kirk/Spock, then later Starsky/Hutch, Napoleon/Illya, and many others) started to appear in zines. These became known as slash fiction from the '/' mark used in adzines. The slash help to differentiate a K&amp;S story (which would have been a Kirk and Spock friendship story) from a K/S story, which would have been one with a romantic or sexual bent between the characters. Slash zines eventually had their own subgenres, such as Femslash. By 2000, when web publishing of stories became more popular than zine publishing, thousands of media fanzines had been published; over 500 of them were k/s zines.\nAnother popular franchise for fanzines was the \"Star Wars\" saga. By the time the film \"The Empire Strikes Back\" was released in 1980, Star Wars fanzines had surpassed Star Trek zines in sales. An unfortunate episode in fanzine history occurred in 1981 when Star Wars director George Lucas threatened to sue fanzine publishers who distributed zines featuring the Star Wars characters in sexually explicit stories or art.\nComics were mentioned and discussed as early as the late 1930s in the fanzines of science fiction fandom. Famously, the first version of Superman (a bald-headed villain) appeared in the third issue of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster's 1933 fanzine \"Science Fiction\". In 1936, David Kyle published \" The Fantasy World \", possibly the first comics fanzine. Malcolm Willits and Jim Bradley started \"The Comic Collector's News\" in October 1947. By 1952, Ted White had mimeographed a four-page pamphlet about Superman, and James Vincent Taurasi, Sr. issued the short-lived \"Fantasy Comics\". In 1953, Bhob Stewart published \"The EC Fan Bulletin\", which launched EC fandom of imitative EC fanzines. A few months later, Stewart, White, and Larry Stark produced \"Potrzebie\", planned as a literary journal of critical commentary about EC by Stark. Among the wave of EC fanzines that followed, the best-known was Ron Parker's \"Hoo-Hah!\". After that came fanzines by the followers of Harvey Kurtzman's \"Mad\", \"Trump\" and \"Humbug\". Publishers of these included future underground comics stars like Jay Lynch and Robert Crumb.\nIn 1960, Richard and Pat Lupoff launched their science fiction and comics fanzine \"Xero\". In the second issue, \"The Spawn of M.C. Gaines'\" by Ted White was the first in a series of nostalgic, analytical articles about comics by Lupoff, Don Thompson, Bill Blackbeard, Jim Harmon and others under the heading, \"All in Color for a Dime\". In 1961, Jerry Bails' \"Alter Ego\", devoted to costumed heroes, became a focal point for superhero comics fandom and is thus sometimes mistakenly cited as the first comics fanzine.\nContacts through these magazines were instrumental in creating the culture of modern comics fandom: conventions, collecting, etc. Much of this, like comics fandom itself, began as part of standard science fiction conventions, but comics fans have developed their own traditions. Comics fanzines often include fan artwork based on existing characters as well as discussion of the history of comics. Through the 1960s, and 1970s, comic fanzines followed some general formats, such as the industry news and information magazine (\"The Comic Reader\" was one example), interview, history, and review-based fanzines, and the fanzines which basically represented independent comic book-format exercises. While perceived quality varied widely, the energy and enthusiasm involved tended to be communicated clearly to the readership, many of whom were also fanzine contributors. Prominent comics zines of this period included \"Alter Ego\", \"The Comic Reader\", and \"Rocket's Blast Comicollector\", all started by Jerry Bails. During the 1970s, many fanzines (\"Squa Tront\", as an example) also became partly distributed through certain comic book distributors.\nOne of the first British comics fanzines was Phil Clarke's \"KA-POW\", launched in 1967. Prominent British comics fanzines of the 1970s and early 1980s included the long-running \"Fantasy Advertiser\", Martin Lock's \"BEM\", Richard Burton's \"Comic Media News\", Alan Austin's \"Comics Unlimited\", George Barnett's \"The Panelologist\", and Richard Ashford's \"Speakaeasy\".\nAt times, the professional comics publishers have made overtures to fandom via 'prozines', in this case fanzine-like magazines put out by the major publishers. \"The Amazing World of DC Comics\" and the Marvel magazine \"FOOM\" began and ceased publication in the 1970s. Priced significantly higher than standard comics of the period (\"AWODCC\" was $1.50, \"FOOM\" was 75 cents), each house-organ magazine lasted a brief period of years. Since 2001 in Britain, there have been created a number of fanzines pastiching children's comics of the 1970s, and 1980s (e.g. \"Solar Wind\", \"Pony School\", etc.). These adopt a style of storytelling rather than specific characters from their sources, usually with a knowing or ironic twist.\nHorror film.\nAs with comics zines, horror film fanzines grew from related interest within science fiction fan publications. \"Trumpet,\" edited by Tom Reamy, was a 1960s SF zine that branched into horror film coverage. Alex Soma's \"Horrors of the Screen,\" Calvin T. Beck's \"Journal of Frankenstein\" (later \"Castle of Frankenstein\") and Gary Svehla's \"Gore Creatures\" were the first horror fanzines created as more serious alternatives to the popular Forrest J Ackerman 1958 magazine \"Famous Monsters of Filmland.\" \"Gore Creatures\" began in 1961 and continues today as the prozine (and specialty publisher) \"Midnight Marquee.\" \"Garden Ghouls Gazette\"\u2014a 1960s horror title under the editorship of Dave Keil, then Gary Collins\u2014was eventually headed by the late Frederick S. Clarke (1949\u20132000) and in 1967 became the respected journal \"Cinefantastique.\" It later became a prozine under journalist-screenwriter Mark A. Altman and has continued as a webzine.\nMark Frank's \"Photon\"\u2014notable for the inclusion of an 8x10 photo in each issue\u2014was another 1960s zine that lasted into the 1970s. Richard Klemensen's \"Little Shoppe of Horrors\", having a particular focus on \"Hammer Horrors\", began in 1972 and is still publishing as of 2025. \"The Animation Journal\" (1964-1966) edited by Indiana natives Steve Towsley and Bill Shrock was perhaps the first fanzine devoted to the makers of stop-motion animated monsters.\nThe Baltimore-based \"Black Oracle\" (1969\u20131978) from writer-turned-John Waters repertory member George Stover was a diminutive zine that evolved into the larger-format \"Cinemacabre.\" Stover's \"Black Oracle\" partner Bill George published his own short-lived zine \"The Late Show\" (1974\u20131976; with co-editor Martin Falck), and later became editor of the \"Cinefantastique\" prozine spinoff \"Femme Fatales\". In the mid-1970s, North Carolina teenager Sam Irvin published the horror/science-fiction fanzine \"Bizarre\", which included his original interviews with UK actors and filmmakers; Irvin would later become a producer-director in his own right. \n\"Japanese Fantasy Film Journal\" (JFFJ) (1968\u20131983) from Greg Shoemaker covered Toho's \"Godzilla\" and his Asian brethren. \"Japanese Giants\" (JG) was founded by Stephen Mark Rainey in 1974 and was published for 30 years. In 1993, \"G-FAN\" was published, and reached its 100th regularly published issue in Fall 2012. \"FXRH\" (Special effects by Ray Harryhausen) (1971\u20131976) was a specialized zine co-created by future Hollywood FX artist Ernest D. Farino.\nRock and roll.\nBy the mid-1960s, several fans active in science fiction and comics fandom recognized a shared interest in rock music, and the rock fanzine was born. Paul Williams and Greg Shaw were two such SF-fans turned rock zine editors. Williams' \"Crawdaddy!\" (1966) and Shaw's two California-based zines, \"Mojo Navigator\" (full title, \"Mojo-Navigator Rock and Roll News\") (1966) and \"Who Put the Bomp\", (1970), are among the most important early rock fanzines.\n\"Crawdaddy!\" (1966) quickly moved from its fanzine roots to become one of the first rock music \"prozines\", with paid advertisers and newsstand distribution. \"Bomp\" remained a fanzine, featuring many writers who would later become prominent music journalists, including Lester Bangs, Greil Marcus, Ken Barnes, Ed Ward, Dave Marsh, Metal Mike Saunders and R. Meltzer. \"Bomp\" featured cover art by Jay Kinney and Bill Rotsler, both veterans of SF and Comics fandom. \"Bomp\" was not alone; an August 1970 issue of \"Rolling Stone\" included an article about the explosion of rock fanzines. Other rock fanzines of this period include \"denim delinquent\" 1971, edited by Jymn Parrett, \"Flash,\" 1972, edited by Mark Shipper, \"Eurock Magazine\" (1973\u20131993) edited by Archie Patterson and \"Bam Balam,\" written and published by Brian Hogg in East Lothian, Scotland, beginning in 1974, and in the mid-1970s, \"Back Door Man\".\nIn the post-punk era, several well-written fanzines emerged that cast an almost academic look at earlier, neglected musical forms, including Mike Stax' \"Ugly Things\", Billy Miller and Miriam Linna's \"Kicks\", Jake Austen's \"Roctober\", Kim Cooper's \"Scram\", P. Edwin Letcher's \"Garage &amp; Beat\", and the UK's \"Shindig!\" and Italy's \"Misty Lane\".\nIn the 1980s, with the rise of stadium superstars, many home-grown rock fanzines emerged. At the peak of Bruce Springsteen's megastardom following the \"Born in the U.S.A.\" album and Born in the U.S.A. Tour in the mid-1980s, there were no less than five Springsteen fanzines circulating at the same time in the UK alone, and many others elsewhere. Gary Desmond's \"Candy's Room\", coming from Liverpool, was the first in 1980, quickly followed by Dan French's \"Point Blank\", Dave Percival's \"The Fever\", Jeff Matthews' \"Rendezvous\", and Paul Limbrick's \"Jackson Cage\". In the US, \"Backstreets Magazine\" started in Seattle in 1980 and still continues today as a glossy publication, now in communication with Springsteen's management and official website. In the late 1990s, numerous fanzines and e-zines flourished about electronic and post-rock music. \"Cr\u00e8me Br\u00fbl\u00e9e\" fanzine was one of those that documented post-rock genre and experimental music.\nPunk.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe punk subculture in the United Kingdom spearheaded a surge of interest in fanzines as a countercultural alternative to established print media. In his 1985 book \"One Chord Wonders\", Dave Laing argues that fanzines, along with self-produced 7\" single records, were the essence of 'punk difference'. Matt Worley, in \"Xerox Machine\", sees the significance of fanzines in punk as both at the time a response to 'an out-of-touch [mainstream] music press' and retrospectively as a way of 'trac[ing] punk's cultural influence into the backrooms, bedrooms and side streets of Britain'. The first and still best known UK 'punk zine' was \"Sniffin' Glue\", produced by Deptford punk fan Mark Perry. \"Sniffin' Glue\" ran for 12 photocopied issues; the first issue was produced by Perry immediately following (and in response to) the London debut of The Ramones on 4 July 1976. Other UK fanzines included \"Blam!\", \"Bombsite\", \"Wool City Rocker\", \"Burnt Offering\", \"Sideburns\", \"Chainsaw\", \"New Crimes\", \"Vague\", \"Jamming\", Artcore Fanzine, \"Love and Molotov Cocktails\", \"To Hell With Poverty\", \"New Youth\", \"Peroxide\", \"ENZK\", \"Juniper beri-beri\", \"No Cure\", \"Communication Blur\", \"Rox\", \"Grim Humour\", \"Spuno\", \"Cool Notes\" and \"Fumes\". Of these, Tony Fletcher's \"Jamming\" was the most far reaching, becoming a nationally distributed mainstream magazine for several years before its demise.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, \"Punk\" began publication in 1976 out of New York City and played a major part in popularizing punk rock (a term coined a few years earlier in \"Creem\") as the term for the music and the bands being written about.\n\"Flipside\" and \"Slash\" were important punk fanzines from the Los Angeles scene, both debuting in 1977. The San Francisco-based punk fanzine \"Search and Destroy\", which published from 1977 to 1979, eventually became the influential fringe-cultural magazine \"Re/Search\". \"Damage\" published 13 issues there from 1979 to 1981. \"Maximum RocknRoll\", also from San Francisco, was a major punk fanzine, with over 300 issues published since 1982.\nThe Washington, D.C. punk community generated several fanzines in the late 1970s and early 1980s, such as \"Capitol Crisis\", \"Vintage Violence\", \"Thrillseeker\", \"If This Goes On\", and \"Descenes\".\nAs punk and alternative culture grew more popular throughout the 1980s and 1990s\u2014evidenced by the success of punk and alternative rock bands like Sonic Youth, Nirvana, Fugazi, Bikini Kill, Green Day and The Offspring\u2014thousands of other punk fanzines appeared in the United States, such as \"Punk Planet\", \"Left of the Dial\", \"Tail Spins\", \"Sobriquet\", \"Profane Existence\" and \"Slug and Lettuce\".\nSome punk fanzines from the 1980s, like \"No Class\" and \"Ugly American\" experienced a second life by placing all past content online for free and adding new content. Although fewer in number in the 21st century, punk fanzines still exist in the United States, such as \"Suburban Rebels\" and \"Razorcake\", both from California.\nMost punk fanzines were printed in small quantities and promoted their respective local scenes. They were often cheaply photocopied and many never survived beyond a few issues. Their greatest contribution was in promoting punk music, clothing, and lifestyle in their local communities. Punk bands and independent labels often sent records to the zines for review and many of the people who started the zines became critical connections for punk bands on tour.\nAustralia\nIn 1977, Bruce Milne and Clinton Walker fused their respective punk zines \"Plastered Press\" and \"Suicide Alley\" to launch \"Pulp\"; Milne later went on to invent the cassette zine with \"Fast Forward\", in 1980.\nAfter the year 2000.\nIn the UK, \"Fracture\" and \"Reason To Believe\" were significant fanzines in the early 2000s, but both ended in late 2003. \"Rancid News\" filled the gap left by these two zines for a short while. On its tenth issue \"Rancid News\" changed its name to \"Last Hours\" with 7 issues published under this title before going on hiatus. \"Last Hours\" still operates as a webzine though with more focus on the anti-authoritarian movement than its original title. \"Artcore Fanzine\" (established in 1986) continues to this day, recently publishing a number of 30-year anniversary issues. There are many smaller fanzines in existence throughout the UK that focus on punk.\nMark Wilkins and Mystic Records.\nMark Wilkins, the promotion director for 1982 onwards US punk/thrash label Mystic Records, had over 450 US fanzines and 150 foreign fanzines he promoted to regularly. He and Mystic Records owner Doug Moody edited \"The Mystic News Newsletter\" which was published quarterly and went into every promo package to fanzines. Wilkins also published the highly successful Los Angeles punk humor zine \"Wild Times\" and when he ran out of funding for the zine syndicated some of the humorous material to over 100 US fanzines under the name of Mystic Mark.\nItaly.\nIn Perugia, Italy, \"Mazquerade\" ran from 1979 to 1981.\nIn Basilicata, Italy, \"Raw Art Fanzine\" ran from 1995 to 2000.\nIn Milan, Italy, \"Gorezilla\" ran from 1988 to 1991.\nMod.\nIn the United Kingdom, the 1979 Mod revival, which was inspired by the 1960s Mod subculture, brought with it a burst of fresh creativity from fanzines, and for the next decade, the youth subculture inspired the production of dozens of independent publications. The most successful of the first wave was \"Maximum Speed\", which successfully captured the frenetic world of a mod revival scene that was propelling bands like Secret Affair, Purple Hearts and The Chords into the UK charts.\nAfter the genre had started to go out of fashion with mainstream audiences in 1981, the mod revival scene went underground and successfully reinvented itself through a series of clubs, bands and fanzines that breathed fresh life into the genre, culminating in another burst of creative acceptance in 1985. This success was largely driven by the network of underground fanzines, the most important and far reaching of which were \"Extraordinary Sensations\", produced by future radio DJ Eddie Piller, and \"Shadows &amp; Reflections\", published by future national magazine editor Chris Hunt. The latter in particular pushed back the boundaries of fanzine production, producing glossy, professionally written and printed publications at a time (1983\u20131986) when most fanzines were produced via photocopier and letraset.\nLocal music.\nIn the UK, there were also fanzines that covered the local music scene in a particular town or city. Mainly prevalent in the 1970s, and 1980s, all music styles were covered, whether the bands were playing rock, punk, metal, futurist, ska or dance. Featured were local gig reviews and articles that were below the radar of the mainstream music press. They were produced using the technology of the time, i.e. typewriter and Letraset. Examples include \"Bombsite Fanzine\" (Liverpool 1977), Wool City Rocker (Bradford 1979\u20131982), \"City Fun\" (Manchester), 1984, Spuno (Bath 1980) \"No Cure\" (Berkshire) and \"Town Hall Steps\" (Bolton) and more recently \"mono\" (fanzine), (Bradford) with many more across the country, such as Premonition Tapes Tapezine on cassette (Sheffield 1987) and Crime Pays (Liverpool 1988).\nRole-playing-game fanzines.\nAnother sizable group of fanzines arose in role-playing game (RPG) fandom, where fanzines allowed people to publish their ideas and views on specific games and their role-playing campaigns. In 1975, was released the apazine \"Alarums and Excursions\".\nRole-playing fanzines allowed people to communicate in the 1970s, and 1980s with complete editorial control in the hands of the players, as opposed to the game publishers. These early RPG fanzines were generally typed, sold mostly in an A5 format (in the UK) and were usually illustrated with abysmal or indifferent artwork.\nA fanzine community developed and was based on sale to a reading public and exchanges by editor/publishers. Many of the pioneers of RPG got their start in, or remain part of, science fiction fandom. This is also true of the small but still active board game fandom scene, the most prolific subset of which is centered around play-by-mail \"Diplomacy\".\nThe UK fanzine \"Aslan\" (1988\u20131991) was responsible for popularization of freeform role-playing games in the UK.\nVideo gaming.\nVideo game fanzines first emerged during the second generation period at a time when gaming stores and newsletters for computer user groups were beginning to become established but had not yet receive significant recognition by purchasers and gamers. The earliest such publication was \"Joystick Jolter\". Other subscriber-based newsletters included \"\" (UK, all things Atari, 1st issue Nov 1987), \"The Video Game Update\", later titled \"Computer Entertainer\".\nAs desktop publishing tools became more accessible, there was an increase in fanzine production. Fanzines generally emphasized either classic gaming (e.g. \"2600 Connection\" and \"Classic Systems &amp; Games Monthly\"), or current gaming (e.g. \"APE\" and \"The Subversive Sprite\"). Less commonly, some fanzines covered both topics (e.g. \"Digital Press\" and \"Joystick &amp; Screen\"). The number of zines grew with the development of video game journalism as writers like Arnie Katz and Chris Bieniek used their columns in mainstream magazines like \"Video Games &amp; Computer Entertainment\", \"EGM\", and \"Tips &amp; Tricks\", to publish reviews of promising fanzines. These mainstream reviews had the effect of introducing fan editors to each other and of creating a fanzine scene.\nThe popularity of video game fanzines diminished greatly with the rise of the internet, however some zines\u2014particularly the classic gaming ones (e.g. \"Classic Gamer Magazine\" and \"Video Game Collector\")\u2014continued beyond the mid-90s. The rise of \"on demand\" publishing has led to a new outlet for print zines, like \"Jumpbutton\" and \"Scroll\".\nThe video game fanzine era was biggest in the US and Canada, but zines are also produced in other countries. Prominent video game fanzines produced in the UK include \"Retrogamer\", \"Pixel Nation\", \"Capcom Fanzine\", \"Mercury\", and \"Super Famicom Mini Mag\" among others. In France fanzines like \"Revival\" were circulated, and Japan has seen the production of lavish doujin works.\nMore recently, there has been a mini-resurgence in video game fanzines, with the launch of \"HyperPlay RPG\" in 2015 and \"Switch Player\" in 2017. Based in part on \"Super Play\"s focus on role-playing games and \"any-bit\" Nintendo, \"HyperPlay RPG\" received positive reviews by the mainstream video game media.\nWargaming.\nSeveral fanzines exist within the hobby of wargaming. Among them is \"Charge!\", a leading international fanzine exclusively for miniature wargaming enthusiasts for the American Civil War period. Other fanzines support Warhammer and other popular rules sets.\nSport.\nThe first association football fanzine is regarded as being \"Foul\", a publication that ran between 1972 and 1976. In the UK, most Premier League or Football League football clubs have one or more fanzines which supplement, oppose and complement the club's official magazine or matchday programme. A reasonably priced zine has a guaranteed audience, as is the culture of passion in being a football fan.\nThe longest running fanzine is \"The City Gent\", produced by supporters of Bradford City FC, which first went on sale at Valley Parade in November 1984 and is now in its 26th season. Following close on its heels was Nike, Inc. which was first released in 1989. At the time it was not the first of its kind with \"Terrace Talk\" (York City), which was first published in November 1981 and \"Wanderers Worldwide\" (Bolton Wanderers) having already been established but since disappeared. In 1985 the emergent \"When Saturday Comes\" (a fanzine without a specific club focus that was subsequently launched as a mainstream magazine) promoted a 'fanzine movement' that gave birth to many more club titles during the late 1980s which was something of a glory period for fanzines.\nWith the widespread availability of the Internet, much of the energy that was put into football fanzines subsequently went into the development of supporters' websites. Examples of other UK football fanzines include \"A Love Supreme\" (Sunderland), \"TOOFIF\" (Fulham), \"The Square Ball\" (Leeds United), \"4,000 Holes\" (Blackburn Rovers) and \"War of the Monster Trucks\" (a Sheffield Wednesday fanzine named after a local TV station elected not to show the final scenes of an unlikely cup victory). The Queen's Park Rangers fanzine 'A Kick up the Rs' was first published in August 1987 and is still issuing an average of 10 issues per season.\nFanzines are not exclusive to the top tiers of football however, with Northern Counties East League side Scarborough Athletic FC having a fanzine titled \"Abandon Chip!\", a pun based on both the perilous situation of predecessor club Scarborough FC and that club's sponsors, McCain.\nAnd also away from the world of Football there were a number of established fanzines, for example Rugby league has such notable publications as \"Who The Hell Was St. George Anyway?\" Rugby League fanzine, by supporters of Doncaster RLFC and \"Scarlet Turkey\" of Salford City Reds.However, due to pressure from the Internet etc. these publications no longer exist in printed form. The title of World's longest running Rugby League fanzine now belongs to \"The Aye of the Tigers\", by Castleford Tigers supporters. The fanzine movement has even spread to the United States, where ice hockey fans have produced several popular fanzines. In Chicago two examples include the formerly published \"Blue Line Magazine\" and currently \"The Committed Indian\", both produced by Chicago Blackhawks fans. In St. Louis there are \"Game Night Revue\" and \"St Louis Game Time\" for the St. Louis Blues.\nThere are also a number of fanzines to be found in Ireland of which Shelbourne's \"Red Inc.\" has been running since 1999, and is the only one still in existence.\nIn the United States, sports fanzines are relatively rare. In Boston they are a bit more common. There are two fanzines sold outside Fenway Park including \"Yawkey Way Report\", which is run by a former Marine.\nRecent developments.\nWith the increasing availability of the Internet in the late 20th and the early 21st century, the traditional paper zine has begun to give way to the webzine (or \"e-zine\") that is easier to produce and uses the potential of the Internet to reach an ever-larger, possibly global, audience. Nonetheless, printed fanzines are still produced, either out of preference for the format or to reach people who do not have convenient Web access. Online versions of approximately 200 science fiction fanzines will be found at Bill Burns' eFanzines web site, along with links to other SF fanzine sites. In addition, zine festivals are held each year in American cities like Los Angeles, Chicago, and Brooklyn, as well as internationally in cities including Melbourne, Australia, and Glasgow, UK."}
{"id": "11102", "revid": "1253695942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11102", "title": "Forgotten Futures", "text": "Forgotten Futures is a role-playing game created by Marcus Rowland to allow people to play in settings inspired by Victorian and Edwardian science fiction and fantasy (i.e., steampunk). Most of its releases begin with these stories then add background material to explain the settings (often as alternate worlds, whose history diverges from our own), adventures, and other game material.\nGame system.\nThe base system uses three characteristics (Body, Mind, and Soul) and a range of skills; points are used to purchase characteristics and skills based on one or more of the characteristics. Skills and characteristics are used by opposing them to a target (such as a difficulty number, an opponent's skill or characteristics, etc.) using a 2D6 dice roll. Subsequent revisions to the rules add options including a Magic characteristic, melodramatic character traits, and other complications, but the core system remains unchanged.\nRowland is believed to have pioneered the concept of shareware tabletop role-playing games with this system, although there were earlier shareware computer games with role-playing elements. Users can download the rules from his web site, buy a subscription that entitles them to Forgotten Futures CDs, or buy a copy of the published version of this game. The CDs are also good sources for science fiction books and other period material whose copyright has expired. A proportion of his income from the game is donated to cancer research charities.\nCurrently several versions of the rules are on line (complete and summary versions in HTML and PDF, and a German translation in PDF), along with a sample adventure set in a Victorian Channel Tunnel, plus eleven game collections (source material plus background worldbook, adventures, etc.), with an expanding collection of additional resources on line and on the CD-ROM. The rules and sample adventure have twice been published in print; in brief form as a booklet given away with \"Arcane Magazine\" in 1997, and at full length by Heliograph Inc. in 1999.\nIn May 2016 Rowland announced that due to delays in the next release and changes in European tax law he would end shareware distribution of the game. Instead he intends to put all of the existing material on line, including the full contents of the CD, with a tip jar for voluntary contributions, and hopes to add more material. Users with current shareware registrations were offered a partial refund or the option to donate it to Cancer Research UK.\nReception.\nIn the November 1994 edition of \"Pyramid\" (Issue #10), Ken and Jo Walton liked both the content of \"Forgotten Futures 2\" and the shareware concept, saying, \"This is an excellent, atmospheric, roleplaying game, made slightly unapproachable by its unusual distribution method. It is available only on disk; you unzip the file and print out the book for yourself. All text files are ASCII format, all pictures are GIFs.\"\nIn the March 1998 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 245), Allen Varney called \"Forgotten Futures\" \"A very substantial and admirable shareware RPG from one of Britain's top designers, based on the British 'scientific romances' popular a century ago.\" Varney also complimented Marcus Rowland for trying to keep those old 'scientific romance' stories in circulation, saying, \"Aside from the game's real virtues, this worthy mission makes \"Forgotten Futures\" a must for any fan of science fiction's early history.\""}
{"id": "11103", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11103", "title": "Fabritio Caroso", "text": "Fabritio Caroso da Sermoneta (1526/1535 \u2013 1605/1620) was an Italian Renaissance dancing master and a composer or transcriber of dance music.\nHis dance manual \"Il Ballarino\" was published in 1581, with a subsequent edition, significantly different, \"Nobilt\u00e0 di Dame\", printed in 1600 and again after his death in 1630. The work has been published in English as \"Courtly Dance of the Renaissance\" by Julia Sutton.\nBoth manuals have been printed in facsimile edition. Many of the dances of Fabritio Caroso's manuals are meant for two dancers with a few for four or more dancers. These manuals offer a great deal of information to dance historians and musicologists alike in that each description of a dance is accompanied by music examples with lute tablature and directions about how each music example is to be played. Many of the dances also contain dedications to noble women of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries."}
{"id": "11104", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11104", "title": "Fatah", "text": "Fatah ( ; ), formally the Palestinian National Liberation Movement (), is a Palestinian nationalist and social democratic political party. It is the largest faction of the confederated multi-party Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the second-largest party in the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC). Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, is the chairman of Fatah.\nFatah was historically involved in armed struggle against the state of Israel (as well as Jordan during the Black September conflict in 1970\u20131971) and maintained a number of militant groups, which carried out attacks against military targets as well as Israeli civllians, notably including the 1978 Coastal Road massacre, though the group disengaged from armed conflict against Israel around the time of the Oslo Accords, when it recognised Israel, which gave it limited control over the Occupied Palestinian territories. During the Second Intifada (2000\u20132005), Fatah intensified armed conflict against Israel, claiming responsibility for a number of suicide attacks. Fatah had been closely identified with the leadership of its founder and chairman, Yasser Arafat, until his death in 2004, when Farouk Kaddoumi constitutionally succeeded him to the position of Fatah Chairman and continued in the position until 2009, when Abbas was elected chairman. Since Arafat's death, factionalism within the ideologically diverse movement has become more apparent.\nIn the 2006 election for the PLC, the party lost its majority in the PLC to Hamas. The Hamas legislative victory led to a conflict between Fatah and Hamas, with Fatah retaining control of the Palestinian National Authority in the West Bank through its president. Fatah is also active in the control of Palestinian refugee camps.\nEtymology.\nThe full name of the movement is , meaning the \"Palestinian National Liberation Movement\". From this was crafted the inverted and reverse acronym (generally rendered in English as \"Fatah\"), meaning \"opening\", \"conquering\", or \"victory\". The word is used in religious discourse to signify the Islamic expansion in the first centuries of Islamic history\u00a0\u2013 as in , the \"conquering of the Levant\". also has religious significance in that it is the name of the 48th \"sura\" (chapter) of the Quran which, according to major Muslim commentators, details the story of the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah. During the peaceful two years after the Hudaybiyyah treaty, many converted to Islam, increasing the strength of the Muslim side. It was the breach of this treaty by the Quraysh that triggered the conquest of Mecca. This Islamic precedent was cited by Yasser Arafat as justification for his signing the Oslo Accords with Israel.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Fatah movement was founded in 1959 by members of the Palestinian diaspora, principally by professionals working in the Persian Gulf States, especially Kuwait (then a British protectorate) where the founders Salah Khalaf, Khalil al-Wazir, Yasser Arafat resided. The founders had studied in Cairo or Beirut and had been refugees in Gaza. Salah Khalaf and Khalil al-Wazir were official members of the Muslim Brotherhood. Yasser Arafat had previously been head of the General Union of Palestinian Students (GUPS) at the Cairo University (1952\u20131956), whilst another co-founder, Khaled Yashruti, then a 22-year-old student, was the GUPS head in Beirut. Upon founding, Arafat summoned Mahmud Abbas (who was residing in Qatar, then a British protectorate) to join. The group of Gulf-based young Palestinian professionals were the core of Fatah in its early days of existence. Fatah espoused a Palestinian nationalist ideology in which Palestinian Arabs would be liberated by their own actions.\nImmediately after its establishment the name of the movement was first used in \"Falastinuna\" which was the official media organ of the Fatah.\n1967\u20131993.\nFatah became the dominant force in Palestinian politics after the Six-Day War in 1967.\nFatah joined the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in 1967, and was allocated 33 of 105 seats in the PLO Executive Committee. Fatah's Yasser Arafat became Chairman of the PLO in 1969, after the position was ceded to him by Yahya Hammuda. According to the BBC, \"Mr Arafat took over as chairman of the executive committee of the PLO in 1969, a year that Fatah is recorded to have carried out 2,432 guerrilla attacks on Israel.\"\nBattle of Karameh.\nThroughout 1968, Fatah and other Palestinian armed groups were the target of a major Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) operation in the Jordanian village of Karameh, where the Fatah headquartersas well as a mid-sized Palestinian refugee campwere located. The town's name is the Arabic word for \"dignity\", which elevated its symbolism to the Arab people, especially after the Arab defeat in 1967. The operation was in response to attacks against Israel, including rockets strikes from Fatah and other Palestinian militias into the occupied West Bank. Knowledge of the operation was available well ahead of time, and the government of Jordan (as well as a number of Fatah commandos) informed Arafat of Israel's large-scale military preparations. Upon hearing the news, many guerrilla groups in the area, including George Habash's newly formed group the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Nayef Hawatmeh's breakaway organization the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), withdrew their forces from the town. Fatah leaders were advised by a pro-Fatah Jordanian divisional commander to withdraw their men and headquarters to nearby hills, but on Arafat's orders, Fatah remained, and the Jordanian Army agreed to back them if heavy fighting ensued.\nOn the night of 21 March, the IDF attacked Karameh with heavy weaponry, armored vehicles and fighter jets. Fatah held its ground, surprising the Israeli military. As Israel's forces intensified their campaign, the Jordanian Army became involved, causing the Israelis to retreat in order to avoid a full-scale war. By the end of the battle, nearly 150 Fatah militants had been killed, as well as twenty Jordanian soldiers and twenty-eight Israeli soldiers. Despite the higher Arab death toll, Fatah considered themselves victorious because of the Israeli army's rapid withdrawal.\nBlack September.\nIn the late 1960s, tensions between Palestinians and the Jordanian government increased greatly; heavily armed Arab resistance elements had created a virtual \"state within a state\" in Jordan, eventually controlling several strategic positions in that country. After their victory in the Battle of Karameh, Fatah and other Palestinian militias began taking control of civil life in Jordan. They set up roadblocks, publicly humiliated Jordanian police forces, molested women and levied illegal taxes \u2013 all of which Arafat either condoned or ignored.\nIn 1970, the Jordanian government moved to regain control over its territory, and the next day, King Hussein declared martial law. By 25 September, the Jordanian army achieved dominance in the fighting, and two days later Arafat and Hussein agreed to a series of ceasefires. The Jordanian army inflicted heavy casualties upon the Palestinians \u2013 including civilians \u2013 who suffered approximately 3,500 fatalities. Two thousand Fatah fighters managed to enter Syria. They crossed the border into Lebanon to join Fatah forces in that country, where they set up their new headquarters. A large group of guerrilla fighters led by Fatah field commander Abu Ali Iyad held out the Jordanian Army's offensive in the northern city of Ajlun until they were decisively defeated in July 1971. Abu Ali Iyad was executed and surviving members of his commando force formed the Black September Organization, a splinter group of Fatah. In November 1971, the group assassinated Jordanian prime minister Wasfi al-Tal as retaliation to Abu Ali Iyad's execution.\nIn the 1960s and the 1970s, Fatah provided training to a wide range of European, Middle Eastern, Asian, and African militant and insurgent groups, and carried out numerous attacks against Israeli targets in Western Europe and the Middle East during the 1970s. Some militant groups that affiliated themselves to Fatah, and some of the \"fedayeen\" within Fatah itself, carried out civilian-aircraft hijackings and terrorist attacks, attributing them to Black September, Abu Nidal's Fatah-Revolutionary Council, Abu Musa's group, the PFLP, and the PFLP-GC. Fatah received weapons, explosives and training from the Soviet Union and some of the communist states of East Europe. China and Algeria also provided munitions. In 1979, Fatah aided Uganda during the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War. Members of the organization fought alongside the Uganda Army and Libyan troops against the Tanzania People's Defence Force during the Battle of Lukaya and the Fall of Kampala, but were eventually forced to retreat from the country.\nLebanon.\nSince the death of Eljamal in 1968, the Palestinian cause had a large base of supporters in Lebanon.\nAlthough hesitant at first to take sides in the conflict, Arafat and Fatah played an important role in the Lebanese Civil War. Succumbing to pressure from PLO sub-groups such as the PFLP, DFLP and the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), Fatah aligned itself with the communist and Nasserist Lebanese National Movement (LNM). Although originally aligned with Fatah, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad feared a loss of influence in Lebanon and switched sides. He sent his army, along with the Syrian-backed Palestinian factions of as-Sa'iqa and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine \u2013 General Command (PFLP-GC) led by Ahmad Jibril to fight alongside the Christian forces against the PLO and the LNM. The primary component of the Christian militias was the Maronite Phalangists.\nPhalangist forces killed twenty-six Fatah trainees on a bus in April 1975, marking the official start of the 15-year-long Lebanese civil war. Later that year, an alliance of Christian militias overran the Palestinian refugee camp of Karantina killing over 1,000 civilians. The PLO and LNM retaliated by attacking the town of Damour, a Phalangist and Tigers (Ahrar) stronghold, killing 684 civilians. As the civil war progressed over 2 years of urban warfare, both parties resorted to massive artillery duels and heavy use of sniper nests, while atrocities and war crimes were committed by both sides.\nIn 1976, with strategic planning help from the Lebanese Army, the alliance of Christian militias, spearheaded by the National Liberal Party of former President Cammille Chamoun militant branch, the noumour el ahrar (NLP Tigers), took a pivotal refugee camp in the Eastern part of Beirut, the Tel al-Zaatar camp, after a six-month siege, also known as Tel al-Zaatar massacre in which hundreds perished. Arafat and Abu Jihad blamed themselves for not successfully organizing a rescue effort.\nPLO cross-border raids against Israel grew somewhat during the late 1970s. One of the most severeknown as the Coastal Road massacreoccurred on 11 March 1978. A force of nearly a dozen Fatah fighters landed their boats near a major coastal road connecting the city of Haifa with Tel Aviv-Yafo. There they hijacked a bus and sprayed gunfire inside and at passing vehicles, killing thirty-seven civilians. In response, the IDF launched Operation Litani three days later, with the goal of taking control of Southern Lebanon up to the Litani River. The IDF achieved this goal, and Fatah withdrew to the north into Beirut.\nIsrael invaded Lebanon again in 1982. Beirut was soon besieged and bombarded by the IDF; to end the siege, the US and European governments brokered an agreement guaranteeing safe passage for Arafat and Fatahguarded by a multinational forceto exile in Tunis. Despite the exile, many Fatah commanders and fighters remained in Lebanon, and they faced the War of the Camps in the 1980s in their fight with the Shia Amal Movement and also in connection with internal schisms within the Palestinian factions.\nAfter 1993.\nPresidential and legislative elections.\nIn the 1993\u20131995 Oslo Accords, Fatah, as part of the PLO, made some interim agreements with Israel, including recognition of Israel by the PLO. Until his 2004 death, Arafat headed the Palestinian National Authority, the provisional entity created as a result of those Oslo Accords. Soon after Arafat's death, Farouk Kaddoumi was elected to the post, which he continues to hold.\nFatah nominated Mahmoud Abbas in the Palestinian presidential election of 2005.\nIn 2005, Hamas won in nearly all the municipalities it contested. Political analyst Salah Abdel-Shafi told the BBC about the difficulties of Fatah leadership: \"I think it's very, very seriousit's becoming obvious that they can't agree on anything.\" Fatah is \"widely seen as being in desperate need of reform,\" as \"the PA's performance has been a story of corruption and incompetenceand Fatah has been tainted.\"\nInternal discord.\nIn December 2005, jailed Intifada leader Marwan Barghouti broke ranks with the party and announced that he had formed a new political list to run in the elections called the \"al-Mustaqbal\" (\"The Future\"), mainly composed of members of Fatah's \"Young Guard.\" These younger leaders have repeatedly expressed frustration with the entrenched corruption in the party, which has been run by the \"Old Guard\" who returned from exile in Tunisia following the Oslo Accords. Al-Mustaqbal was to campaign against Fatah in the 2006 Palestinian legislative election, presenting a list including Mohammed Dahlan, Kadoura Fares, Samir Mashharawi and Jibril Rajoub. However, on 28 December 2005, the leadership of the two factions agreed to submit a single list to voters, headed by Barghouti, who began actively campaigning for Fatah from his jail cell.\nThere have been numerous other expressions of discontent within Fatah, which is just holding its first general congress in two decades. Because of this, the movement remains largely dominated by aging cadres from the pre-Oslo era of Palestinian politics. Several of them gained their positions through the patronage of Yasser Arafat, who balanced above the different factions, and the era after his death in 2004 has seen increased infighting among these groups, who jockey for influence over future development, the political line, funds, and constituencies. There is concern over the succession once Abbas leaves power.\nThere have been no open splits within the older generation of Fatah politicians since the 1980s, though there is occasional friction between members of the top leadership. One founding member, Faruq al-Qaddumi (Abu Lutf), continues to openly oppose the post-Oslo arrangements and has intensified his campaign for a more hardline position from exile in Tunis. Since Arafat's death, he is formally head of Fatah's political bureau and chairman, but his actual political following within Fatah appears limited. He has at times openly challenged the legitimacy of Abbas and harshly criticized both him and Mohammed Dahlan, but despite threats to splinter the movement, he remains in his position, and his challenges have so far been fruitless. Another influential veteran, Hani al-Hassan, has also openly criticized the present leadership.\nFatah's internal conflicts have also, due to the creation of the Palestinian Authority, merged with the turf wars between different PA security services, e.g., a longstanding rivalry between the West Bank (Jibril Rajoub) and Gaza (Muhammad Dahlan) branches of the powerful Preventive Security Service. Foreign backing for different factions contribute to conflict, e.g., with the United States generally seen as supportive of Abbas's overall leadership and of Dahlan's security influence, and Syria alleged to promote Faruq al-Qaddumi's challenge to the present leadership. The younger generations of Fatah, especially within the militant al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades, have been more prone to splits, and a number of lesser networks in Gaza and the West Bank have established themselves as either independent organizations or joined Hamas. However, such overt breaks with the movement have still been rather uncommon, despite numerous rivalries inside and between competing local Fatah groups.\n2009: Sixth General Assembly.\nThe Sixth General Assembly of the Fatah Movement began on 4 August 2009 in Bethlehem, nearly 16 years after the Oslo I Accord and 20 years since the last Fatah convention, after being repeatedly postponed over conflicts ranging from representation to venue. More than 2,000 delegates attended the meeting, while another 400 from the Gaza Strip were unable to attend the conference after Hamas barred them from traveling to the West Bank.\nThe internal dissension was immediately obvious. Saudi King Abdullah told the delegates that divisions among the Palestinians were more damaging to their cause of an independent state than the Israeli \"enemy\".\nDelegates resolved not to resume Israeli-Palestinian peace talks until 14 preconditions were met. Among these preconditions were the release of all Israel-held Palestinian prisoners, a freeze on all Israeli settlement construction, and an end to the Gaza blockade.\nBy affirming its option for \"armed resistance\" against Israel, Fatah appealed to Palestinians who wanted a more hardline response to Israel.\nIsraeli deputy foreign minister Danny Ayalon said the conference was a \"serious blow to peace\" and \"was another lost opportunity for the Palestinian leadership to adopt moderate views.\"\nElections to Central Committee and Revolutionary Council.\nOn 9 August 2009, new members of the Central Committee of Fatah and the Revolutionary Council were chosen. Delegates voted to fill 18 seats on the 23-seat Central Committee, and 81 seats on the 128-seat Revolutionary Council after a week of deliberations. At least 70 new members entered the latter, with 20 seats going to Fatah representatives from the Gaza Strip, 11 seats filled by women (the highest number of votes went to one woman who spent years in Israeli jails for her role in the resistance), four seats went to Christians, and one was filled by a Jewish-born convert to Islam, Uri Davis, the first Jewish-born person to be elected to the Revolutionary Council since its founding in 1958. Fatah activists from the Palestinian diaspora were also represented and included Samir Rifai, Fatah's secretary in Syria, and Khaled Abu Usba.\nElected to the central council was Fadwa Barghouti, the wife of Marwan Barghouti who was serving five life sentences in Israel for his role in terrorist attacks on civilians in Israel during the Second Intifada.\nReconciliation process with Hamas.\nA meeting of the Revolutionary Council was held in Ramallah from 18 to 19 October 2014. Many important questions were discussed, including reconciliation with Hamas. Opinion was divided on this issue.\n2016: Seventh Congress.\nIn December 2016, more than 1400 members of Fatah's 7th Congress elected 18 members of the Central Committee and 80 for the Revolutionary Council. Six new members were added to the Central Committee while 12 were reelected. Outgoing members included Nabil Shaath, Nabil Abu Rudeineh, Zakaria al-Agha and Tayib Abdul Rahim.\nIts leader Abu Ashraf Al-Armoushi and his comrades were killed in the Al-Basateen neighborhood of Ain Al-Helweh camp on 30 July 2023 during a fighting.\nIdeology.\nFatah has \"Member Party\" status at the Socialist International and has \"Observer Party\" status within the Party of European Socialists.\nThe November 1959 edition of Fatah's underground journal \"Filastinuna Nida al-Hayat\" indicated that the movement was motivated by the status of the Palestinian refugees in the Arab world:\nArmed struggleas manifested in the 1936\u201339 Arab revolt in Palestine and the military role of Palestinian fighters under the leadership of Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli Warwas central to Fatah's initial ideology of how to liberate Palestine.\nStructure.\nFatah's two most important decision-making bodies are the Central Committee and Revolutionary Council. The Central Committee is mainly an executive body, while the Revolutionary Council is Fatah's legislative body.\nArmed factions.\nFatah has maintained a number of militant groups since its founding. Its mainstream military branch is al-'Asifah. Fatah is generally considered to have had a strong involvement in terrorism in the past, though unlike its rival Islamist faction Hamas, Fatah is no longer regarded as a terrorist organization by any government. Fatah used to be designated terrorist under Israeli law and was considered terrorist by the United States Department of State and United States Congress until it renounced terrorism in 1988.\nFatah has, since its inception, created, led or sponsored a number of armed groups and militias, some of which have had an official standing as the movement's armed wing, and some of which have not been publicly or even internally recognized as such. The group has also dominated various PLO and Palestinian Authority forces and security services which were/are not officially tied to Fatah, but in practice have served as wholly pro-Fatah armed units, and been staffed largely by members. The original name for Fatah's armed wing was al-'Asifah (\"The Storm\"), and this was also the name Fatah first used in its communiques, trying for some time to conceal its identity. This name has since been applied more generally to Fatah armed forces, and does not correspond to a single unit today. Other militant groups associated with Fatah include:\nDuring the Second Intifada, the group was a member of the Palestinian National and Islamic Forces.\nConstitution.\nIn August 2009, at Fatah's Sixth General Conference in Bethlehem, Fatah delegates drew up a new \"internal charter\"."}
{"id": "11105", "revid": "26270034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11105", "title": "Forteana", "text": ""}
{"id": "11106", "revid": "15908871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11106", "title": "Francesco Boromini", "text": ""}
{"id": "11107", "revid": "40754995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11107", "title": "Food and Agriculture Organization", "text": "The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations that leads international efforts to defeat hunger and improve nutrition and food security. Its Latin motto, , translates to \"let there be bread\". It was founded on 16 October 1945.\nThe FAO comprises 195 members, including 194 countries and the European Union. Its headquarters is in Rome, Italy, and it maintains regional and field offices worldwide, operating in over 130 countries. It helps governments and development agencies coordinate their activities to improve and develop agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and land and water resources. It also conducts research, provides technical assistance to projects, operates educational and training programs, and collects agricultural output, production, and development data.\nThe FAO is governed by a biennial conference representing each member country and the European Union, which elects a 49-member executive council. The director-general, as of 2019 Qu Dongyu of China, serves as the chief administrative officer. Various committees govern matters such as finance, programs, agriculture, and fisheries. \nHistory.\nThe idea of an international organization for food and agriculture emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century, advanced primarily by Polish-born American agriculturalist and activist David Lubin. In May\u2013June 1905, an international conference was held in Rome, Italy, which led to the creation of the International Institute of Agriculture (IIA) by the King of Italy, Victor Emmanuel III.\nThe IIA was the first intergovernmental organization to deal with the problems and challenges of agriculture on a global scale. It worked primarily to collect, compile, and publish data on agriculture, ranging from output statistics to a catalog of crop diseases. Among its achievements was the publication of the first agricultural census in 1930.\nWorld War II effectively ended the IIA. During the war, in 1943, United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt called a League of Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture, which brought representatives from forty-four governments to The Omni Homestead Resort in Hot Springs, Virginia, from 18 May to 3 June to attend the Hot Springs Conference. The main impetus for the conference was the British-born Australian economist Frank L. McDougall, who since 1935 had advocated for an international forum to address hunger and malnutrition.\nThe Conference ended with a commitment to establish a permanent organization for food and agriculture, which was achieved on 16 October 1945 in Quebec City, Canada, following the Constitution of the Food and Agriculture Organization. The first session of the FAO Conference began the same day in the Ch\u00e2teau Frontenac in Quebec City and ended on 1 November 1945. This was led by Sir John Boyd Orr where his work on ending world hunger and creation of FAO resulted in him winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949.\nAfter the war, the IIA was officially dissolved by resolution of its Permanent Committee on 27 February 1948. Its functions, facilities, and mandate were then transferred to the newly established FAO, which maintained its headquarters in Rome.\nThe FAO's initial functions supported agricultural and nutrition research and provided technical assistance to member countries to boost production in agriculture, fishery, and forestry. Beginning in the 1960s, it focused on efforts to develop high-yield strains of grain, eliminate protein deficiency, promote rural employment, and increase agricultural exports. The FAO recognized the decrease of these resources as an urgent problem in 1961 and created a joint collaboration with the International Biological Program (IBP) in 1967. To that end, it joined the UN General Assembly in creating the UN World Food Programme, the largest humanitarian organization addressing hunger and promoting food security.\nThe FAO launched what would become the FAO Money and Medals Programme (MMP) in 1968. FAO issued collector art medals in various series to bring attention to FAO's goals and missions. This program was responsible for over a hundred medal designs issued to the collecting public. A thirtieth anniversary medal of the MMP was issued in 1998.\nIn 1974, in response to famine in Africa, the FAO convened the first World Food Summit to address widespread hunger, malnutrition, and food insecurity. The meeting resulted in a proclamation that \"every man, woman, and child has the inalienable right to be free from hunger and malnutrition to develop their physical and mental faculties\" and a global commitment to eradicate these issues within a decade. A subsequent summit in 1996 addressed the shortcomings in achieving this goal while establishing a strategic plan for eliminating hunger and malnutrition into the 21st century.\nEvery year, FAO publishes a number of major 'State of the World' reports related to food, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources.\nStructure and finance.\nIn 1951, the FAO's headquarters were moved from Washington, D.C., United States, to Rome, Italy. The agency is directed by the Conference of Member Nations, which meets every two years to review the work carried out by the organization and to Work and Budget for the next two-year period. The conference elects a council of 49 member states (serve three-year rotating terms) that acts as an interim governing body, and the director-general, who heads the agency.\nThe FAO is composed of eight departments: Agriculture and Consumer Protection, Climate, Biodiversity, Land and Water Department, Economic and Social Development, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Forestry, Corporate Services and Technical Cooperation and Programme Management.\nBeginning in 1994, the FAO underwent the most significant restructuring since its founding, to decentralize operations, streamline procedures and reduce costs. As a result, savings of about US$50 million, \u20ac43 million a year were realized.\nBudget.\nThe FAO's Regular Programme budget is funded by its members, through contributions set at the FAO Conference. This budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships including the Technical Cooperation Programme, knowledge exchange, policy and advocacy, direction and administration, governance and security.\nThe total FAO Budget planned for 2018\u20132019 is US$1,005.6 million. The voluntary contributions provided by members and other partners support mechanical and emergency (including rehabilitation) assistance to governments for clearly defined purposes linked to the results framework, as well as direct support to FAO's core work. The voluntary contributions are expected to reach approximately US$1.6 billion in 2016\u20132017.\nThis overall budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships, leading to Food and Agriculture Outcomes at 71 percent; Core Functions at 11 percent; the Country Office Network \u2013 5 percent; Capital and Security Expenditure \u2013 2 percent; Administration \u2013 6 percent; and Technical and Cooperation Program \u2013 5 percent.\nOffices.\nFAO Headquarters.\nThe world headquarters is located in Rome, in the former seat of the Department of Italian East Africa. One of the most notable features of the building was the Axum Obelisk which stood in front of the agency seat, although just outside the territory allocated to the FAO by the Italian Government. It was taken from Ethiopia by Benito Mussolini's troops in 1937 as war booty and returned on 18 April 2005.\nPartnership and Liaison Offices.\nPartnership and Liaison Offices provide for stronger country participation in the FAO's work and programmes at national, sub-regional, regional, and inter-regional levels, and enhanced cooperation through unilateral trust fund projects and South\u2013South cooperation.\nPriority work areas.\nFAO has outlined the following priorities in its fight against hunger.\nTwo fundamental areas of work \u2013 gender and governance \u2013 are fully integrated in the above strategic objective action plans.\nProgrammes and achievements.\n\"Codex Alimentarius\".\nFAO and the World Health Organization created the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 1961 to develop food standards, guidelines, and texts such as codes of practice under the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The programme's main aims are protecting consumer health, ensuring fair trade, and promoting co-ordination of all food standards work undertaken by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.\nWorld Food Summit.\nIn 1996, FAO organized the World Food Summit, attended by 112 Heads or Deputy Heads of State and Government. The Summit concluded with the signing of the Rome Declaration, which established the goal of halving the number of people who suffer from hunger by 2015. At the same time, 1,200 civil society organizations (CSOs) from 80 countries participated in an NGO forum. The forum was critical of the growing industrialization of agriculture and called upon governments \u2013 and FAO \u2013 to do more to protect the 'Right to Food' for the poor.\nTeleFood.\nIn 1997, FAO launched TeleFood, a campaign of concerts, sporting events, and other activities to harness the power of media, celebrities, and concerned citizens to help fight hunger. Since its start, the campaign has generated close to US$28 million, \u20ac15 million in donations. Money raised through TeleFood pays for small, sustainable projects that help small-scale farmers produce more food for their families and communities.\nThe projects provide tangible resources, such as fishing equipment, seeds, and agricultural implements. They vary enormously, from helping families raise pigs in Venezuela through creating school gardens in Cape Verde and Mauritania or providing school lunches in Uganda and teaching children to grow food to raising fish in a leper community in India.\nFAO Goodwill Ambassadors.\nThe FAO Goodwill Ambassadors Programme was initiated in 1999. It was created to increase public awareness and disseminate information about issues related to food security and hunger in the world.\nRight to Food Guidelines.\nIn 2004 the Right to Food Guidelines were adopted which offer guidance to states on how to implement their obligations on the right to food.\nResponse to food crisis.\nIn December 2007, FAO launched its Initiative on soaring food prices to help small producers raise their output and earn more. Under the initiative, FAO contributed to the work of the UN High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis, which produced the Comprehensive Framework for Action. FAO has carried out projects in over 25 countries and inter-agency missions in nearly 60, scaled up its monitoring through the Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture, provided policy advice to governments while supporting their efforts to increase food production, and advocated for more investment in agriculture as well as provided funding to distribute and multiply quality seeds in Haiti, which has significantly increased food production, thereby providing cheaper food.\nFAO\u2013EU partnership.\nIn May 2009, FAO and the European Union signed an initial aid package worth \u20ac125 million to support small farmers in countries hit hard by rising food prices. The aid package falls under the EU's \u20ac1 billion Food Facility, set up with the UN Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis and FAO to focus on programmes that will have a quick but lasting impact on food security. FAO is receiving around \u20ac200 million for work in 25 countries, of which \u20ac15.4 million goes to Zimbabwe.\nFood security programmes.\nThe Special Programme for Food Security is FAO's flagship initiative for reaching the goal of halving the number of hungry in the world by 2015 (currently estimated at close to 1 billion people) as part of its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals. Through projects in over 100 countries worldwide, the programme promotes effective, tangible solutions to eliminating hunger, undernourishment, and poverty. Currently, 102 countries are engaged in the programme, and of these, approximately 30 have begun shifting from pilot to national programmes. To maximize the impact of its work, FAO strongly promotes national ownership and local empowerment in the countries in which it operates.\nOnline campaign against hunger.\nThe 1billionhungry project became the EndingHunger campaign in April 2011. Spearheaded by FAO in partnership with other UN agencies and private nonprofit groups, the EndingHunger movement pushes the boundaries of conventional public advocacy. It builds on the success in 2010 of The 1billonhungry project and the subsequent chain of public events that led to the collection of over three million signatures on a global petition to end hunger (www.EndingHunger.org). The petition was originally presented to representatives of world governments at a ceremony in Rome on 30 November 2010.\nThe web and partnerships are two pivotal and dynamic aspects of EndingHunger. The campaign relies on the assistance of organizations and institutions that can facilitate the project's diffusion, by placing banners on their own websites or organizing events aimed to raise awareness of the project. In its 2011 season, the campaign expanded its multimedia content, pursued mutual visibility arrangements with partner organizations, and sharpened its focus on 14- to 25-year-olds, who were encouraged to understand their potential as a social movement to push for the end of hunger.\nMoreover, the EndingHunger project is a viral communication campaign, renewing and expanding its efforts to build the movement through Facebook, Twitter and other social networks. Those who sign the petition can spread the link of the EndingHunger website to their friends, via social media or mail, in order to gain awareness and signatures for the petition. The next interim objective is to grow the EndingHunger movement's Facebook community to 1 million members. As with the petition, the more people who get involved, the more powerful the message to governments: \"We are no longer willing to accept the fact that hundreds of millions live in chronic hunger.\" Groups and individuals can also decide on their own to organize an event about the project, simply by gathering friends, whistles, T-shirts and banners (whistles and T-shirts can be ordered, and petition sign sheets downloaded, on the endinghunger.org website) and thereby alert people about chronic hunger by using the yellow whistle.\nThe original 1billionhungry campaign borrowed as its slogan the line \"I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!\", used by Peter Finch in the 1976 film, \"Network\". Meanwhile, the yellow whistle has been the campaign symbol from the start, from 1billionhungry to Ending Hunger. (The creative concept was provided by the McCann Erickson Italy Communication Agency.) It symbolizes the fact that we are \"blowing the whistle\" on the silent disaster of hunger. It is both a symbol and \u2013 at many live events taking place around the world \u2013 a physical means of expressing frustration and making some noise about the hunger situation.\nBoth The 1billionhungry and the EndingHunger campaigns have continued to attract UN Goodwill Ambassadors from the worlds of music and cinema, literature, sport, activism and government. Some of the well known individuals who have become involved include former Brazilian President Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva, former presidents of Chile Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet, actress Susan Sarandon, actors Jeremy Irons and Raul Bova, singers C\u00e9line Dion and Anggun, authors Isabelle Allende and Andrea Camilleri, musician Chucho Vald\u00e9s and Olympic track-and-field legend Carl Lewis.\nAgriculture.\nInternational Plant Protection Convention.\nFAO created the International Plant Protection Convention or IPPC in 1952. This international treaty organization works to prevent the international spread of pests and plant diseases in both cultivated and wild plants. Among its functions are the maintenance of lists of plant pests, tracking of pest outbreaks, and coordination of technical assistance between member nations. As of July 2018, 183 contracting parties have ratified the treaty.\nPlant Treaty (ITPGRFA).\nFAO is depositary of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, also called \"Plant Treaty\", \"Seed Treaty\" or \"ITPGRFA\", entered into force on 29 June 2004.\nAlliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition.\nThe Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition (AAHM) aims to address how countries and organizations can be more effective in advocating and carrying out actions to address hunger and malnutrition. As a global partnership, AAHM creates global connections between local, regional, national and international institutions that share the goals of fighting hunger and malnutrition. The organization works to address food security by enhancing resources and knowledge sharing and strengthening hunger activities within countries and across state lines at the regional and international levels.\nFollowing the World Food Summit, the Alliance was initially created in 2002 as the 'International Alliance Against Hunger (IAAH)' to strengthen and coordinate national efforts in the fight against hunger and malnutrition. The mission of the Alliance originates from the first and eighth UN Millennium Development Goals; reducing the number of people that suffer from hunger in half by 2015 (preceded by the \"Rome Declaration\" in 1996) and developing a global partnership for development. The Alliance was founded by the Rome-based food agencies \u2013 the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), UN World Food Programme (WFP), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), \u2013 and Bioversity International.\nAAHM connects top-down and bottom-up anti-hunger development initiatives, linking governments, UN organizations, and NGOs together in order to increase effectiveness through unity.\nIntegrated pest management.\nDuring the 1990s, FAO took a leading role in the promotion of integrated pest management for rice production in Asia. Hundreds of thousands of farmers were trained using an approach known as the Farmer Field School (FFS). Like many of the programmes managed by FAO, the funds for Farmer Field Schools came from bilateral Trust Funds, with Australia, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland acting as the leading donors. FAO's efforts in this area have drawn praise from NGOs that have otherwise criticized much of the work of the organization.\nTrans-boundary pests and diseases.\nFAO established an \"Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases\" in 1994, focusing on the control of diseases like rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease and avian flu by helping governments coordinate their responses. One key element is the \"Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme\", which has advanced to a stage where large tracts of Asia and Africa have now been free of the cattle disease rinderpest for an extended period of time. Meanwhile, the \"\" monitors the worldwide locust situation and keeps affected countries and donors informed of expected developments.\nGlobal Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building.\nThe Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building (GIPB) is a global partnership dedicated to increasing plant breeding capacity building. The mission of GIPB is to enhance the capacity of developing countries to improve crops for food security and sustainable development through better plant breeding and delivery systems. The ultimate goal is to ensure that a critical mass of plant breeders, leaders, managers and technicians, donors and partners are linked together through an effective global network.\nIncreasing capacity building for plant breeding in developing countries is critical for the achievement of meaningful results in poverty and hunger reduction and to reverse the current worrisome trends. Plant breeding is a well recognized science capable of widening the genetic and adaptability base of cropping systems, by combining conventional selection techniques and modern technologies. It is essential to face and prevent the recurrence of crises such as that\nof the soaring food prices and to respond to the increasing demands for crop based sources of energy.\nInvestment in agriculture.\nFAO's technical cooperation department hosts an Investment Centre that promotes greater investment in agriculture and rural development by helping developing countries identify and formulate sustainable agricultural policies, programmes and projects. It mobilizes funding from multilateral institutions such as the World Bank, regional development banks and international funds as well as FAO resources.\nGlobally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS).\nThe Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) Partnership Initiative was conceptualized and presented by Parviz Koohafkan the Task Manager of Chapter 10 of Agenda 21 in Food and Agricultural Organization of United Nations, FAO in 2002 during World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, South Africa. This UN Partnership Initiative aims to identify, support and safeguard Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and their livelihoods, agricultural and associated biodiversity, landscapes, knowledge systems and cultures around the world. The GIAHS Partnership recognizes the crucial importance of the well-being of family farming communities in an integrated approach while directing activities towards sustainable agriculture and rural development.\nCommission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA).\nThe Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, established in 1983, provides an intergovernmental forum that specifically addresses biological diversity for food and agriculture. Its main objective is to ensure the sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity for food and agriculture and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from its use, for present and future generations.\nAnimal Genetic Resources.\nFAO has a unit focused on Animal Genetic Resources, which are defined as \"those animal species that are used, or may be used, for the production of food and agriculture, and the populations within each of them. These populations within each species can be classified as wild and feral populations, land-races and primary populations, standardized breeds, selected lines, varieties, strains and any conserved genetic material; all of which are currently categorized as Breeds.\" FAO assists countries in implementation of the Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources. FAO supports a variety of \"ex situ\" and \"in situ\" conservation strategies including cryoconservation of animal genetic resources.\nForestry.\nOne of FAO's strategic goals is the sustainable management of the world's forests. The \"Forestry Division\" works to balance social and environmental considerations with the economic needs of rural populations living in forest areas. FAO serves as a neutral forum for policy dialogue, as a reliable source of information on forests and trees and as a provider of expert technical assistance and advice to help countries develop and implement effective national forest programmes.\nFAO is both a global clearinghouse for information on forests and forest resources and a facilitator that helps building countries' local capacity to provide their own national forest data. In collaboration with member countries, FAO carries out periodic global assessments of forest resources, which are made available through reports, publications and the FAO's Web site. The \"Global Forest Resources Assessment\" provides comprehensive reporting on forests worldwide every five years. FRA 2020 is the most recent global assessment. The results, data and analyses are available online in different formats, including key findings, main report and country reports.\nEvery two years, FAO publishes the \"State of the World's Forests\", a major report covering current and emerging issues facing the forestry sector.\nSince 1947, FAO has published the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, a compilation of statistical data on basic forest products from over 100 countries and territories of the world. It contains data on the volume of production; and the volume, value and direction of trade in forest products.\n\"Unasylva\", FAO's peer-reviewed journal on forestry, has been published in English, French and Spanish on a regular basis since 1947, the longest-running multilingual forestry journal in the world.\nThe FAO is an official sponsor of International Day of Forests, on 21 March each year, as proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly on 28 November 2012.\nEvery six years since 1926, FAO and a host member state hold the World Forestry Congress. It is a forum for the sharing of knowledge and experience regarding the conservation, management and use of the world's forests, and covers such issues as international dialogue, socio-economic and institutional aspects, and forest policies.\nThe Forestry Department is also organized geographically in several groups covering the whole world's forest ecosystems. One of them is the Silva Mediterranean work-group, covering the pan-Mediterranean region.\nTree Cities of the World.\nAt the World Forum on Urban Forests in October 2018, the FAO and the Arbor Day Foundation jointly launched the Tree Cities of the World programme. The aim of this programme is to celebrate and recognize cities and towns of all sizes throughout the world which have shown a commitment to maintaining their urban forests. From the end of 2019, any municipality which has responsibility for its trees was able to apply to join Tree Cities of the World. On 4 February 2020, 59 cities were announced as having achieved the designation of Tree City of the World. There were 27 in the United States, with the rest scattered across the world.\nFisheries.\nThe FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department is defined through its vision and mission statements:\nThe work of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Department centers on the \"Sustainable management and use of fisheries and aquaculture resource\", embracing normative as well as operational activities, whether implemented from headquarters or from the field.\nThe FAO \"Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries\" was adopted in 1995.\nStatistics.\nESSG is an acronym for the Global Statistics Service, the major \"section\" of the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization - Statistics Division. It is responsible for updating and disseminating the FAOSTAT report. This offers free and easy access to data for 245 countries and 35 regional areas from 1961 through the most recent year available. Enhanced features include browsing and analysis of data, an advanced interactive data download, and enhanced data exchange through web services.\nThe Land and Water Division maintains a database of global water statistics, Aquastat. The Fisheries and Aquaculture Division maintains a database of global Fisheries and Aquaculture statistics, FishStat.\nMembership.\nAs of 1 May 2020, the Organization has 194 Member Nations, one Member Organization, and two Associate Members.\nTaiwan (at the time representing China), withdrew from the FAO in 1951. in 1971, the People's Republic of China was recognized as the representative of China by the FAO and the withdrawal from part of Taiwan was not taken into account.\nThe only UN member state that is a non-member of the FAO is Liechtenstein.\nBoth UN observer states are also non-members of the FAO: the Holy See (Vatican City) and Palestine.\nSome countries may denote specific representatives to the FAO, for instance the United States Ambassador to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, who has ambassador rank and is also a part of the United States Mission to the UN Agencies in Rome.\nCriticism.\n1970s, 80s, 90s.\nThere has been public criticism of FAO for at least 30 years. Dissatisfaction with the organization's performance was among the reasons for the creation of two new organizations after the World Food Conference in 1974, namely the World Food Council and the International Fund for Agricultural Development; by the early eighties there was intense rivalry among these organizations. At the same time, the World Food Programme, which started as an experimental three-year programme under FAO, was growing in size and independence, with the Directors of FAO and WFP struggling for power.\nEarly in 1989, the organization came under attack from Heritage Foundation, an American conservative think tank, which described the FAO as becoming \"essentially irrelevant in combating hunger\" due to a \"bloated bureaucracy known for the mediocrity of its work and the inefficiency of its staff\", which had become politicized. In September of the same year, the journal \"Society\" published a series of articles about FAO that included a contribution from the Heritage Foundation and a response by FAO staff member, Richard Lydiker, who was later described by the Danish Minister for Agriculture (who had herself resigned from the organization) as \"FAO's chief spokesman for non-transparency\".\nIn 1990, the U.S. State Department expressed the view that \"The Food and Agriculture Organization has lagged behind other UN organizations in responding to US desires for improvements in program and budget processes to enhance value for money spent\".\nA year later, in 1991, \"The Ecologist\" magazine produced a special issue under the heading \"The UN Food and Agriculture Organization: Promoting World Hunger\". The magazine included articles that questioned FAO's policies and practices in forestry, fisheries, aquaculture, and pest control. The articles were written by experts such as Helena Norberg-Hodge, Vandana Shiva, Edward Goldsmith, Miguel A. Altieri and Barbara Dinham.\n2000s.\nThe 2002 Food Summit organized by FAO was considered to have been ineffectual and unproductive by the official participants. Social movements, farmers, fisherfolk, pastoralists, indigenous peoples, environmentalists, women's organizations, trade unions and NGOs expressed their \"collective disappointment in, and rejection of the official Declaration of the\u00a0... Summit\".\nIn 2004, FAO produced a controversial report called \"Agricultural Biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?\", which claimed that \"agricultural biotechnology has real potential as a new tool in the war on hunger\". In response to the report, more than 650 organizations from around the world signed an open letter in which they said \"FAO has broken its commitment to civil society and peasants' organisations\". The letter complained that organizations representing the interests of farmers had not been consulted, that FAO was siding with the biotechnology industry and, consequently, that the report \"raises serious questions about the independence and intellectual integrity of an important United Nations agency\". Jacques Diouf, the Director General of FAO at that time, responded immediately, stating that decisions on biotechnology must \"be taken at the international level by competent bodies\" (in other words, not by non-governmental organizations). He acknowledged, however, that \"biotechnology research is essentially driven by the world's top ten transnational corporations\" and \"the private sector protects its results with patents in order to earn from its investment and it concentrates on products that have no relevance to food in developing countries\".\nIn May 2006, a British newspaper published the resignation letter of Louise Fresco, one of eight Assistant Directors-General of FAO. In her letter, Fresco stated that \"the Organization has been unable to adapt to a new era\", that its \"contribution and reputation have declined steadily\" and \"its leadership has not proposed bold options to overcome this crisis\".\nThe 32nd Session of FAO's Committee on World Food Security in 2006, attended by 120 countries, was widely criticized by non-governmental organizations, but largely ignored by the mainstream media. Oxfam called for an end to the talk-fests while Via Campesina issued a statement that criticised FAO's policy of Food Security.\nOn 18 October 2007, the final report of an Independent External Evaluation of FAO was published. More than 400 pages in length, the evaluation was the first of its kind in the history of the Organization. It had been commissioned by decision of the 33rd Session of the FAO Conference in November 2005. The report concluded that \"The Organization is today in a financial and programme crisis\" but \"the problems affecting the Organization today can all be solved\". Among the problems noted by the IEE were: \"The Organization has been conservative and slow to adapt\"; \"FAO currently has a heavy and costly bureaucracy\", and \"The capacity of the Organization is declining and many of its core competencies are now imperilled\". Among the solutions offered were: \"A new Strategic Framework\", \"institutional culture change and reform of administrative and management systems\". In conclusion the IEE stated that, \"If FAO did not exist it would need to be invented\".\nThe official response from FAO came on 29 October 2007. It indicated that management supported the principal conclusion in the report of the IEE on the need for \"reform with growth\" so as to have an FAO \"fit for this century\". Meanwhile, hundreds of FAO staff signed a petition in support of the IEE recommendations, calling for \"a radical shift in management culture and spirit, depoliticization of appointments, restoration of trust between staff and management, [and] setting strategic priorities of the organization\".\nIn May 2008, while talking about the ongoing world food crisis, President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal expressed the opinion that FAO was \"a waste of money\" and that \"we must scrap it\". Wade said that FAO was itself largely to blame for the price rises, and that the organization's work was duplicated by other bodies that operated more efficiently, like the UN's International Fund for Agricultural Development. However, this criticism may have had more to do with personal animosity between the President and the Director-General, himself a Senegalese, particularly in light of the significant differences in the work carried out by the two organizations.\nIn June 2008, the FAO sponsored the High-Level Conference on World Food Security. The summit was notable for the lack of agreement over the issue of biofuels. The response to the summit among non-governmental organizations was mixed, with Oxfam stating that \"the summit in Rome was an important first step in tackling the food crisis but greater action is now needed\", while Maryam Rahmanian of Iran's Centre for Sustainable Development said \"We are dismayed and disgusted to see the food crisis used to further the policies that have led us to the food crisis in the first place\". As with previous food summits, civil society organizations held a parallel meeting and issued their own declaration to \"reject the corporate industrial and energy-intensive model of production and consumption that is the basis of continuing crises.\"\nIn November 2008, a Special Conference of FAO member countries agreed a US$42.6 million (\u20ac38.6 million), three-year Immediate Plan of Action for \"reform with growth\", as recommended by the IEE. Under the plan US$21.8 million would be spent on overhauling the financial procedures, hierarchies and human resources management.\n2010s.\nFrom 2013, an English-language newspaper based in Rome, \"The Italian Insider\", made several allegations of nepotism and corruption within FAO and reported on poor management-staff relations. In June 2018, FAO and four of its officials took the paper and its editor, John Philips, to court alleging defamation, using a law dating back to the fascist era in Italy. Reporters Without Borders condemned \"the disproportionate nature of the defamation proceedings\", for which the newspaper was liable for a fine of up to Euros 100,000 and the editor at least three years in prison. The case was adjourned until January 2019, when it was further adjourned until May 2019. The January hearing was considered by the British satirical magazine \"Private Eye\" to have been \"one of the more surreal courtroom scenes in modern times\", involving dispute as to the meaning of an English slang word used by the \"Insider\".\nIn 2016/17 FAO was heavily criticized for recruiting Nadine Heredia Alarc\u00f3n de Humala, wife of the former president of Peru, Ollanta Humala, to a senior position, at a time when she was being investigated by Peru following corruption allegations. Critics included Transparency International.\nAt the end of April 2017, FAO staff unions addressed the organization's Governing Council to complain about the practice of issuing short-term contracts that \"exploit employees without providing job security, social security and paid leave\". Other complaints included the increasing centralization of management processes, despite claims that FAO was being decentralized, and the failure to follow United Nations recommendations regarding increasing the retirement age. The staff representative also complained about the high percentage of unfilled positions, increasing the workload for others who were under pressure to deliver more with less. She also noted that contacts between Management and the staff bodies were becoming less and less frequent.\n2020s.\nAn investigation by the German public broadcaster ARD shows that the Chinese leadership of the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation FAO has tailored it to Chinese interests since Qu Dongyu took office in 2019. According to the report, the acting director-general has instrumentalized the FAO in Beijing's interests: It is about deliveries of pesticides banned in Europe, the majority of which come from the Chinese agrochemical company Syngenta, UN projects in line with China's \"Belt and Road Initiative\" as well as questionable investment projects.\nFAO renewal.\nThe FAO Conference in November 2007 unanimously welcomed the IEE report and established a Conference Committee for the Follow-up to the Independent External Evaluation of FAO (CoC-IEE) to be chaired by the Independent Chairperson of Council, and open to full participation by all Members. The CoC-IEE was charged to review the IEE report and its recommendations and develop an Immediate Plan of Action (IPA) for their implementation.\nA comprehensive programme of organizational reform and culture change began in 2008 after the release of an Independent External Evaluation. Headquarters restructuring and delegation of decision making created a flatter more responsive structure and reduced costs. Modernizing and streamlining of administrative and operational processes took place. Improved internal teamwork and closer external partnerships coupled with upgrading of IT infrastructure and greater autonomy of FAO's decentralized offices now allows the Organization to respond quickly where needs are greatest. As FAO is primarily a knowledge based organization, investing in human resources is a top priority. Capacity building including a leadership programme, employee rotation and a new junior professional programme were established. Individual performance management, an ethics and ombudsman officer and an independent office of evaluation were designed to improve performance through learning and strengthened oversight.\nIn January 2012, the Director-General Jos\u00e9 Graziano da Silva acted upon the commitment made during his campaign to bring the FAO reform to a successful and anticipated completion. In addition, the new Director-General shifted the focus of the reform process to realization of its benefits and mainstreaming the reform into the work of the Organization.\nIn July 2020, the FAO Council approved a series of measures proposed by its Director-General Qu Dongyu to modernize the organisation and make it more efficient and effective. An important element within the approved measures is the adoption \"of a more flexible organizational structure, aimed at ensuring agility, optimal cross-sectoral collaboration and better responses to emerging needs and priorities\"."}
{"id": "11108", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11108", "title": "FAO (disambiguation)", "text": "FAO, or the Food and Agriculture Organization, is an agency of the United Nations.\nFAO may also refer to:"}
{"id": "11109", "revid": "28427534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11109", "title": "F\u00e9lix Guattari", "text": "Pierre-F\u00e9lix Guattari ( ; ; 30 March 1930 \u2013 29 August 1992) was a French psychoanalyst, political philosopher, semiotician, social activist, and screenwriter. He co-founded schizoanalysis with Gilles Deleuze, and created ecosophy independently of Arne N\u00e6ss, and is best known for his literary and philosophical collaborations with Deleuze, most notably \"Anti-Oedipus\" (1972) and \"A Thousand Plateaus\" (1980), the two volumes of their theoretical work \"Capitalism and Schizophrenia\".\nBiography.\nClinic of La Borde.\nGuattari was born in Villeneuve-les-Sablons, a working-class suburb of northwest Paris, France. His father was a factory manager and he was engaged in Trotskyist political activism as a teenager, before studying and training under (and being analyzed by) the French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan in the early 1950s. Subsequently, he worked all his life at the experimental psychiatric clinic of La Borde under the direction of Lacan's pupil, the psychiatrist Jean Oury. He first met Oury at a private psychiatric clinic in Saumery in the Loire Valley at the suggestion of Oury's brother Fernand, who had been Guattari's high school teacher. Guattari followed Oury to La Borde in 1955, two years after it had been established. La Borde was a venue for conversation among many students of philosophy, psychology, ethnology, and social work.\nOne particularly novel orientation developed at La Borde consisted of the suspension of the classical analyst/analysand pair in favour of an open confrontation in group therapy. In contrast to the Freudian school's individualistic style of analysis, this practice studied the dynamics of several subjects in complex interaction. It led Guattari into a broader philosophical exploration of, and political engagement with, a vast array of intellectual and cultural domains (philosophy, ethnology, linguistics, education, mathematics, architecture, etc.).\n1960s\u20131970s: political and social activism.\nFrom 1955 to 1965 Guattari edited and contributed to \"La Voie Communiste\" (\"Communist Way\"), a Trotskyist newspaper. He supported anti-colonialist struggles as well as the Italian Autonomists. Guattari also took part in the G.T.P.S.I., which gathered many psychiatrists at the beginning of the 1960s and created the Association of Institutional Psychotherapy in November 1965. It was at the same time that he founded, along with other militants, the F.G.E.R.I. (Federation of Groups for Institutional Study &amp; Research) and its review \"Recherche\" (\"Research\"), working on philosophy, psychoanalysis, ethnology, education, mathematics, architecture, etc. The F.G.E.R.I. came to represent aspects of the multiple political and cultural engagements of Guattari: the Group for Young Hispanics, the Franco-Chinese Friendships (in the times of the people's communes), the opposition activities with the wars in Algeria and Vietnam, the participation in the M.N.E.F., with the U.N.E.F., the policy of the offices of psychological academic aid (B.A.P.U.), the organization of the University Working Groups (G.T.U.), but also the reorganizations of the training courses with the Centers of Training to the Methods of Education Activities (C.E.M.E.A.) for psychiatric male nurses, as well as the formation of a Fellowship of Nurses (Amicales d'infirmiers) (in 1958), the studies on architecture and the projects of construction of a day hospital for \"students and young workers\".\nIn 1967 he appeared as one of the founders of OSARLA (Organization of solidarity and Aid to the Latin-American Revolution). In 1968, Guattari met Daniel Cohn-Bendit, Jean-Jacques Lebel, and Julian Beck. He was involved in the large-scale French protests of May 1968, starting from the Movement of 22 March. It was in the aftermath of 1968 that Guattari met Gilles Deleuze at the University of Vincennes. Then he began to lay the groundwork for \"Anti-Oedipus\" (1972), which Michel Foucault described as \"an introduction to the non-fascist life\" in his preface to the book. In 1970, he created ), which developed the approach explored in the \"Recherches\" journal. In 1973, Guattari was tried and fined for committing an \"outrage to public decency\" for publishing an issue of \"Recherches\" on homosexuality. In 1977, he created the CINEL for \"new spaces of freedom\" before joining the environmental movement with his \"ecosophy\" in the 1980s.\n1970s\u20131980s: deinstitutionalization and anti-psychoanalysis.\nTogether with French post-structuralist philosopher Gilles Deleuze, Guattari asserted that the institution of psychoanalysis has become a center of power and that its confessional techniques resemble those included and utilized within the Christian religion. Their most in-depth criticism of the power structure of psychoanalysis and its connivance with capitalism are found in \"Anti-Oedipus\" (1972) and \"A Thousand Plateaus\" (1980), the two volumes of their theoretical work \"Capitalism and Schizophrenia\". In \"Anti-Oedipus\", Deleuze and Guattari take the cases of G\u00e9rard Mendel, Bela Grunberger, and Janine Chasseguet-Smirgel, prominent members of the most respected psychoanalytical associations (including the IPA), to suggest that, traditionally, psychoanalysis had always enthusiastically enjoyed and embraced a police state throughout its history.\n1980s\u20131990s: last years.\nGuattari viewed the primary commodity produced under capitalism as subjectivity itself. According to Guattari, producing consuming subjects with novel desires satisfiable through continuing purchase of commodities and experiences is the precondition to creating a consumer society. In his last book, \"Chaosmosis\" (1992), Guattari returned to the question of subjectivity: \"How to produce it, collect it, enrich it, reinvent it permanently in order to make it compatible with mutant Universes of value?\" This concern runs through all of his works, from \"Psychoanalysis and Transversality\" (a collection of articles from 1957 to 1972), through \"Years of Winter\" (1980\u20131986) and \"Schizoanalytic Cartographies\" (1989), to his collaboration with Deleuze, \"What is Philosophy?\" (1991). In \"Chaosmosis\", Guattari proposes an analysis of subjectivity in terms of four functors: (1) material, energetic, and semiotic fluxes; (2) concrete and abstract machinic phyla; (3) virtual universes of value; and (4) finite existential territories. This scheme attempts to grasp the heterogeneity of components involved in the production of subjectivity, as Guattari understands it, which include both signifying semiotic components as well as \"a-signifying semiological dimensions\" (which work \"in parallel or independently of\" any signifying function that they may have).\nDeath and posthumous publications.\nOn 29 August 1992, two weeks after an interview for the Greek television curated by Yiorgos Veltsos, Guattari died in La Borde from a heart attack.\nIn 1995, the posthumous release of Guattari's \"Chaosophy\" published essays and interviews concerning Guattari's work as director of the experimental La Borde clinic and his collaborations with Deleuze. The collection includes essays such as \"Balance-Sheet Program for Desiring Machines,\" cosigned by Deleuze (with whom he had coauthored \"Anti-Oedipus\" and \"A Thousand Plateaus\"), and \"Everybody Wants To Be a Fascist.\" It provides an introduction to Guattari's theories on \"schizoanalysis\", a process that develops Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis but which pursues a more experimental and collective approach towards analysis.\nIn 1996, another collection of Guattari's essays, lectures, and interviews, \"Soft Subversions\", was published, which traces the development of his thought and activity throughout the 1980s (\"the winter years\"). His analyses of art, cinema, youth culture, economics, and power formations, develop concepts such as \"micropolitics,\" \"schizoanalysis,\" and \"becoming-woman,\" which aim to liberate subjectivity and open up new horizons for political and creative resistance to the standardizing and homogenizing processes of global capitalism (which he calls \"Integrated World Capitalism\") in the \"post-media era.\" For example, he used the term \"micropolitics\" to delimit a certain level of observation of social practices (the unconscious economy, where there is a certain flexibility in the expression of desire and institution) and, practically, to define, in a segregated world, the field of intervention of \"people who work to interest themselves in the discourse of the other.\"\nWorks.\nUntranslated.\nNote: Many of the essays found in these works have been individually translated and can be found in the English collections.\nOther collaborations"}
{"id": "11110", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11110", "title": "Filioque", "text": " ( ; ), a Latin term meaning \"and from the Son\", was added to the original Nicene Creed, and has been the subject of great controversy between Eastern and Western Christianity. The term refers to the Son, Jesus Christ, with the Father, as the one shared origin of the Holy Spirit. It is not in the original text of the Creed, attributed to the First Council of Constantinople (381), which says that the Holy Spirit proceeds \"from the Father\" () without the addition \"and the Son\".\nIn the late 6th century, some Latin Churches added the words \"and from the Son\" () to the description of the procession of the Holy Spirit, in what many Eastern Orthodox Christians have at a later stage argued is a violation of Canon VII of the Council of Ephesus, since the words were not included in the text by either the First Council of Nicaea or that of Constantinople. The inclusion was incorporated into the liturgical practice of Rome in 1014, but was rejected by Eastern Christianity.\nWhether that term is included, as well as how it is translated and understood, can have major implications for how one understands the doctrine of the Trinity, which is central to the majority of Christian churches. For some, the term implies a serious underestimation of God the Father's role in the Trinity; for others, its denial implies a serious underestimation of the role of God the Son in the Trinity.\nThe term has been an ongoing source of difference between Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, formally divided since the East\u2013West Schism of 1054. There have been attempts at resolving the conflict. Among the earlier works that have been used in support of the compatibility of Filioque with Orthodox dogmatic teachings are the works of Maximus the Confessor in early 7th century, canonized independently by both Eastern and Western churches. Differences over this and other doctrines, and mainly the question of the disputed papal primacy, have been and remain the primary causes of the schism between the Eastern Orthodox and Western churches.\nNicene Creed.\nThe Nicene Creed as amended by the Second Ecumenical Council held in Constantinople in 381 includes the section:\nThe controversy arises from the insertion of the word (\"and the Son\") in the line:\nControversy.\nThe controversy referring to the term involves four separate disagreements:\nAlthough the disagreement about the doctrine preceded the disagreement about the insertion into the Creed, the two disagreements became linked to the third when the pope approved insertion of the term into the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, in the 11th century. Anthony Siecienski writes that \"Ultimately what was at stake was not only God's trinitarian nature, but also the nature of the Church, its teaching authority and the distribution of power among its leaders.\"\nHubert Cunliffe-Jones identifies two opposing Eastern Orthodox opinions about the \"Filioque\", a \"liberal\" view and a \"rigorist\" view. The \"liberal\" view sees the controversy as being largely a matter of mutual miscommunication and misunderstanding. In this view, both East and West are at fault for failing to allow for a \"plurality of theologies\". Each side went astray in considering its theological framework as the only one that was doctrinally valid and applicable. Thus, neither side would accept that the dispute was not so much about conflicting dogmas as it was about different \"theologoumena\" or theological perspectives. While all Christians must be in agreement on questions of dogma, there is room for diversity in theological approaches.\nThis view is vehemently opposed by those in Eastern Orthodox Church whom Cunliffe-Jones identifies as holding a \"rigorist\" view. According to the standard Eastern Orthodox position, as pronounced by Photius, Mark of Ephesus and 20th century Eastern Orthodox theologians such as Vladimir Lossky, the \"Filioque\" question hinges on fundamental issues of dogma and cannot be dismissed as simply one of different \"theologoumena\". Many in the \"rigorist\" camp consider the \"Filioque\" to have resulted in the role of the Holy Spirit being underestimated by the Western Church and thus leading to serious doctrinal error.\nIn a similar vein, Siecienski comments that, although it was common in the 20th century to view the \"Filioque\" as just another weapon in the power struggle between Rome and Constantinople and although this was occasionally the case, for many involved in the dispute, the theological issues outweighed by far the ecclesiological concerns. According to Siecienski, the deeper question was perhaps whether Eastern and Western Christianity had wound up developing \"differing and ultimately incompatible teachings about the nature of God\". Moreover, Siecienski asserts that the question of whether the teachings of East and West were truly incompatible became almost secondary to the fact that, starting around the 8th or 9th century, Christians on both sides of the dispute began to believe that the differences \"were\" irreconcilable.\nFrom the view of the West, the Eastern rejection of the \"Filioque\" denied the consubstantiality of the Father and the Son and was thus a form of crypto-Arianism. In the East, the interpolation of the \"Filioque\" seemed to many to be an indication that the West was teaching a \"substantially different faith\". Siecienski asserts that, as much as power and authority were central issues in the debate, the strength of emotion rising even to the level of hatred can be ascribed to a belief that the other side had \"destroyed the purity of the faith and refused to accept the clear teachings of the fathers on the Spirit's procession\".\nHistory.\nNew Testament.\nIt is argued that in the relations between the persons of the Trinity, one person cannot \"take\" or \"receive\" () anything from either of the others except by way of procession. Biblical texts such as John 20:22 were seen by Fathers of the Church, especially Athanasius of Alexandria, Cyril of Alexandria and Epiphanius of Salamis, as grounds for saying that the Spirit \"proceeds substantially from both\" the Father and the Son. Other texts that have been used include Galatians 4:6, Romans 8:9, Philippians 1:19, where the Holy Spirit is called \"the Spirit of the Son\", \"the Spirit of Christ\", \"the Spirit of Jesus Christ\", texts in the Gospel of John on the sending of the Holy Spirit by Jesus, and John 16:7. Revelation 22:1 states that the river of the Water of Life in Heaven is \"flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb\", which may be interpreted as the Holy Spirit proceeding from both the Father and the Son. Tension can be seen in comparing these two passages:\nSiecienski asserts that \"the New Testament does not explicitly address the procession of the Holy Spirit as later theology would understand the doctrine\", although there are \"certain principles established in the New Testament that shaped later Trinitarian theology, and particular texts that both Latins and Greeks exploited to support their respective positions vis-\u00e0-vis the \". In contrast, Veli-Matti K\u00e4rkk\u00e4inen says that Eastern Orthodox believe that the absence of an explicit mention of the double procession of the Holy Spirit is a strong indication that the is a theologically erroneous doctrine.\nChurch Fathers.\nCappadocian Fathers.\nBasil of Caesarea wrote: \"Through the one Son [the Holy Spirit] is joined to the Father\". He also said that the \"natural goodness, inherent holiness, and royal dignity reaches from the Father through the only-begotten () to the Spirit\". However, Siecienski comments that \"there are passages in Basil that are certainly capable of being read as advocating something like the , but to do so would be to misunderstand the inherently soteriological thrust of his work\".\nGregory of Nazianzus distinguished the coming forth () of the Spirit from the Father from that of the Son from the Father by saying that the latter is by generation, but that of the Spirit by procession (), a matter on which there is no dispute between East and West, as shown also by the Latin Father Augustine of Hippo, who wrote that although biblical exegetes had not adequately discussed the individuality of the Holy Spirit:\nGregory of Nyssa stated:\nAlexandrian Fathers.\nCyril of Alexandria provides \"a host of quotations that seemingly speak of the Spirit's 'procession' from both the Father and the Son\". In these passages he uses the Greek verbs (like the Latin ) and (flow from), not the verb , the verb that appears in the Greek text of the Nicene Creed.\nEpiphanius of Salamis is stated by Bulgakov to present in his writings \"a whole series of expressions to the effect that the Holy Spirit is from the Father and the Son, out of the Father and the Son, from the Father and out of the Son, from Both, from one and the same essence as the Father and the Son, and so on\". Bulgakov concludes: \"The patristic teaching of the fourth century lacks that exclusivity which came to characterize Orthodox theology after Photius under the influence of repulsion from the Filioque doctrine. Although we do not here find the pure that Catholic theologians find, we also do not find that opposition to the that became something of an Orthodox or, rather, anti-Catholic dogma.\"\nRegarding the Greek Fathers, whether Cappadocian or Alexandrian, there is, according to Siecienski, no citable basis for the claim historically made by both sides, that they explicitly either supported or denied the later theologies concerning the procession of the Spirit from the Son. However, they did enunciate important principles later invoked in support of one theology or the other. These included the insistence on the unique hypostatic properties of each Divine Person, in particular the Father's property of being, within the Trinity, the one cause, while they also recognized that the Persons, though distinct, cannot be separated, and that not only the sending of the Spirit to creatures but also the Spirit's eternal flowing forth () from the Father within the Trinity is \"through the Son\" ().\nLatin Fathers.\nSiecienski remarked that, \"while the Greek fathers were still striving to find language capable of expressing the mysterious nature of the Son's relationship to the Spirit, Latin theologians, even during Cyril's lifetime, had already found their answer \u2013 the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son (). The degree to which this teaching was compatible with, or contradictory to, the emerging Greek tradition remains, sixteen centuries later, subject to debate.\"\nBefore the creed of 381 became known in the West and even before it was adopted by the First Council of Constantinople, Christian writers in the West, of whom Tertullian (), Jerome (347\u2013420), Ambrose () and Augustine (354\u2013430) are representatives, spoke of the Spirit as coming from the Father and the Son, while the expression \"from the Father through the Son\" is also found among them.\nIn the early 3rd century Roman province of Africa, Tertullian emphasises that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit all share a single divine substance, quality and power, which he conceives of as flowing forth from the Father and being transmitted by the Son to the Spirit. Using the metaphor the root, the shoot, and the fruit; the spring, the river, and the stream; and the sun, the ray, and point of light for the unity with distinction in the Trinity, he adds, \"The Spirit, then, is third from God and the Son, ...\"\nIn his arguments against Arianism, Marius Victorinus () strongly connected the Son and the Spirit.\nIn the mid-4th century, Hilary of Poitiers wrote of the Spirit \"coming forth from the Father\" and being \"sent by the Son\"; as being \"from the Father through the Son\"; and as \"having the Father and the Son as his source\"; in another passage, Hilary points to John 16:15 (where Jesus says: \"All things that the Father has are mine; therefore I said that [the Spirit] shall take from what is mine and declare it to you\"), and wonders aloud whether \"to receive from the Son is the same thing as to proceed from the Father\".\nIn the late 4th century, Ambrose of Milan asserted that the Spirit \"proceeds from () the Father and the Son\", without ever being separated from either.\nAmbrose adds, \"[W]ith You, Almighty God, Your Son is the Fount of Life, that is, the Fount of the Holy Spirit. For the Spirit is life ...\"\n\"None of these writers, however, makes the Spirit's mode of origin the object of special reflection; all are concerned, rather, to emphasize the equality of status of all three divine persons as God, and all acknowledge that the Father alone is the source of God's eternal being.\"\nPope Gregory I, in Gospel Homily 26, notes that the Son is \"sent\" by the Father both in the sense of an eternal generation and a temporal Incarnation. Thus, the Spirit is said to be \"sent\" by the Son from the Father both as to an eternal procession and a temporal mission. \"The sending of the Spirit is that procession by which It proceeds from the Father and the Son.\" In his \"Moralia in Iob\", initially composed while he was at the imperial court of Constantinople and later edited while Pope of Rome, Gregory wrote, \"But the Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, in all things has Him (the Holy Spirit) both always and continually present. For the same Spirit even in substance is brought forth from Him (.) And thus, though He (the Spirit) abides in the holy Preachers, He is justly said to abide in the Mediator in a special manner, for that in them He abides of grace for a particular object, but in Him He abides substantially for all ends.\" Later in the \"Moralia\" (xxx.iv.17), St. Gregory writes of the procession of the Holy Spirit from Father and Son while defending their co-equality. Thus, he wrote, \"[The Son] shews both how He springs from the Father not unequal to Himself, and how the Spirit of Both proceeds coeternal with Both. For we shall then openly behold, how That Which Is by an origin, is not subsequent to Him from Whom It springs; how He Who is produced by procession, is not preceded by Those from Whom He proceeded. We shall then behold openly how both The One [God] is divisibly Three [Persons] and the Three [Persons] indivisibly One [God].\"\nLater in his \"Dialogues\", Gregory I took the doctrine for granted when he quoted John 16:7, and asked: if \"it is certain that the Paraclete Spirit always proceeds from the Father and the Son, why does the Son say that He is about to leave so that [the Spirit] who never leaves the Son might come?\" The text proposes an eternal procession from both Father and the Son by the use of the word \"always\" (). Gregory I's use of and is also significant for the divine procession because although the Spirit always proceeds () from the Father and the Son, the Spirit never leaves () the Son by this eternal procession.\nModern Catholic theologians.\nYves Congar commented, \"The walls of separation do not reach as high as heaven.\" And Aidan Nichols remarked that \"the controversy is, in fact, a casualty of the theological pluralism of the patristic Church\", on the one hand the Latin and Alexandrian tradition, on the other the Cappadocian and later Byzantine tradition.\nNicene and Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creeds.\nThe original Nicene Creed \u2013 composed in Greek and adopted by the first ecumenical council, Nicaea I (325) \u2013 ended with the words \"and in the Holy Spirit\" without defining the procession of the Holy Spirit. The procession of the Holy Spirit was defined in what is also called the Nicene Creed, or more accurately the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, which was also composed in Greek.\nTraditionally, the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed is attributed to the First Council of Constantinople of 381, whose participants, primarily Eastern bishops, met, decided issues (legates of Pope Damasus I were present).\nThe Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed is not documented earlier than the Council of Chalcedon (451), which referred to it as \"the creed [...] of the 150 saintly fathers assembled in Constantinople\" in its acts. It was cited at Chalcedon I on instructions from the representative of the Emperor who chaired the meeting and who may have wished to present it as \"a precedent for drawing up new creeds and definitions to supplement the Creed of Nicaea, as a way of getting round the ban on new creeds in\" Ephesus I canon 7. The Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed was recognized and received by Leo I at Chalcedon I. Scholars do not agree on the connection between Constantinople I and the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, which was not simply an expansion of the Creed of Nicaea, and was probably based on another traditional creed independent of the one from Nicaea.\nThe Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed is roughly equivalent to the Nicene Creed plus two additional articles: one on the Holy Spirit and another about the Church, baptism, and resurrection of the dead. For the full text of both creeds, see Comparison between Creed of 325 and Creed of 381.\nThe Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed article professes:\nIt speaks of the Holy Spirit \"proceeding from the Father\" \u2013 a phrase based on John 15:26.\nThe Greek word () refers to the ultimate source from which the proceeding occurs, but the Latin verb (and the corresponding terms used to translate it into other languages) can apply also to proceeding through a mediate channel. Frederick Bauerschmidt notes that what Medieval theologians disregarded as minor objections about ambiguous terms, was in fact an \"insufficient understanding of the semantic difference\" between the Greek and Latin terms in both the East and the West. The West used the more generic Latin term (to move forward; to come forth) which is more synonymous with the Greek term () than the more specific Greek term (, \"to issue forth as from an origin\"). The West traditionally used one term and the East traditionally used two terms to convey arguably equivalent and complementary meaning, that is, from the Father and from the Son. Moreover, the more generic Latin term, , does not have \"the added implication of the starting-point of that movement; thus it is used to translate a number of other Greek theological terms.\" It is used as the Latin equivalent, in the Vulgate, of not only , but also , and (four times) and is used of Jesus' originating from God in John 8:42, although at that time Greek was already beginning to designate the Holy Spirit's manner of originating from the Father as opposed to that of the Son ( \u2014 being born).\nThird Ecumenical Council.\nThe third Ecumenical council, Ephesus I (431), quoted the creed in its 325 form, not in that of 381, decreed in Ephesus I canon 7 that:\nEphesus I canon 7 was cited at the Second Council of Ephesus (449) and at the Council of Chalcedon (451), and was echoed in the Chalcedon definition. This account in the 2005 publication concerning the citing by Eutyches of Ephesus I canon 7 in his defence was confirmed by Stephen H. Webb in his 2011 book \"Jesus Christ, Eternal God\".\nEphesus I canon 7, against additions to the Creed of Nicaea, is used as a polemic against the addition of to the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, In any case, while Ephesus I canon 7 forbade setting up a different creed as a rival to that of Nicaea I, it was the creed attributed to Constantinople I that was adopted liturgically in the East and later a Latin variant was adopted in the West. The form of this creed that the West adopted had two additions: \"God from God\" () and \"and the Son\" (). Strictly speaking, Ephesus I canon 7 applies \"only to the formula to be used in the reception of converts.\"\nPhilippe Labbe remarked that Ephesus I canons 7 and 8 are omitted in some collections of canons and that the collection of Dionysius Exiguus omitted all the Ephesus I canons, apparently considered that they did not concern the Church as a whole.\nFourth Ecumenical Council.\nAt the fourth ecumenical council, Chalcedon I (451), both the Nicene Creed of 325 and the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, were read, the former at the request of a bishop, the latter, against the protests of the bishops, on the initiative of the emperor's representative, \"doubtless motivated by the need to find a precedent for drawing up new creeds and definitions to supplement the Creed of Nicaea, as a way of getting round the ban on new creeds in\" Ephesus I canon 7. The acts of Chalcedon I defined that:\nPossible earliest use in the Creed.\nSome scholars claim that the earliest example of the clause in the East is contained in the West Syriac recension of the profession of faith of the Church of the East formulated at the Council of Seleucia-Ctesiphon in Persia in 410. This council was held some twenty years before the Nestorian Schism that caused the later split between the Church of the East and the Church in the Roman Empire. Since wording of that recension (\"who is from the Father and the Son\") does not contain any mention of the term \"procession\" or any of the other particular terms that would describe relations between Father, Son and the Holy Spirit, the previously mentioned claim for the \"earliest use\" of clause is not universally accepted by scholars. Furthermore, another recension that is preserved in the East Syriac sources of the Church of the East contains only the phrase \"and in the Holy Spirit\".\nVarious professions of faith confessed the doctrine during the patristic age. The (380 or 5th century), a profession of faith attributed to Pseudo-Damasus or Jerome, includes a formula of the doctrine. The (400), a profession of faith legislated by the Toledo I synod, includes a formula of the doctrine. The Athanasian Creed (5th century), a profession of faith attributed to Pseudo-Athanasius, includes a formula of the doctrine.\nThe generally accepted first found insertion of the term into the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, in Western Christianity, is in acts of the Third Council of Toledo (Toledo III) (589), nearly two centuries later, but it may be a later interpolation.\nProcession of the Holy Spirit.\nAs early as the 4th century, a distinction was made, in connection with the Trinity, between the two Greek verbs (the verb used in the original Greek text of the 381 Nicene Creed) and . Gregory of Nazianzus wrote: \"The Holy Ghost is truly Spirit, coming forth () from the Father indeed, but not after the manner of the Son, for it is not by Generation but by Procession ()\".\nThat the Holy Spirit \"proceeds\" from the Father and the Son in the sense of the Latin word and the Greek (as opposed to the Greek ) was taught by the early 5th century by Cyril of Alexandria in the East. The Athanasian Creed, probably composed as early as the mid 5th-century, and a dogmatic epistle of Pope Leo I, who declared in 446 that the Holy Spirit proceeds from both Father and Son.\nAlthough the Eastern Fathers were aware that the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son was taught in the West, they did not generally regard it as heretical. According to Sergei Bulgakov \"a whole series of Western writers, including popes who are venerated as saints by the Eastern church, confess the procession of the Holy Spirit also from the Son; and it is even more striking that there is virtually no disagreement with this theory.\" In 447, Leo I taught it in a letter to a Spanish bishop and an anti-Priscillianist council held the same year proclaimed it. The argument was taken a crucial step further in 867 by the affirmation in the East that the Holy Spirit proceeds not merely \"from the Father\" but \"from the Father \".\nThe was inserted into the Creed as an anti-Arian addition, by the Third Council of Toledo (589), at which King Reccared I and some Arians in his Visigothic Kingdom converted to orthodox, Catholic Christianity. The Toledo XI synod (675) included the doctrine but not the term in its profession of faith.\nOther Toledo synods \"to affirm Trinitarian consubstantiality\" between 589 and 693.\nThe clause was confirmed by subsequent synods in Toledo and soon spread throughout the West, not only in Spain, but also in Francia, after Clovis I, king of the Salian Franks, converted to Christianity in 496; and in England, where the Council of Hatfield (680), presided over by Archbishop of Canterbury Theodore of Tarsus, a Greek, imposed the doctrine as a response to Monothelitism.\nHowever, while the doctrine was taught in Rome, the term was not professed liturgically in the Creed until 1014.\nIn the Vulgate the Latin verb , which appears in the passage of the Creed in Latin, is used to translate several Greek verbs. While one of those verbs, , the one in the corresponding phrase in the Creed in Greek, \"was beginning to take on a particular meaning in Greek theology designating the Spirit's unique mode of coming-to-be [...] had no such connotations\".\nAlthough Hilary of Poitiers is often cited as one of \"the chief patristic source(s) for the Latin teaching on the \", Siecienski says that \"there is also reason for questioning Hilary's support for the as later theology would understand it, especially given the ambiguous nature of (Hilary's) language as it concerns the procession.\"\nHowever, a number of Latin Church Fathers of the 4th and 5th centuries explicitly speak of the Holy Spirit as proceeding \"from the Father and the Son\", the phrase in the present Latin version of the Nicene Creed. Examples are what is called the creed of Pope Damasus I, Ambrose of Milan (\"one of the earliest witnesses to the explicit affirmation of the Spirit's procession from the Father the Son\"), Augustine of Hippo (whose writings on the Trinity \"became the foundation of subsequent Latin trinitarian theology and later served as the foundation for the doctrine of the \"). and Leo I, who qualified as \"impious\" those who say \"there is not one who begat, another who is begotten, another who proceeded from both []\"; he also accepted the Council of Chalcedon, with its reaffirmation of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, in its original \"from the Father\" form, as much later did his successor Pope Leo III who professed his faith in the teaching expressed by the , while opposing its inclusion in the Creed.\nThereafter, Eucherius of Lyon, Gennadius of Massilia, Boethius, Agnellus, Bishop of Ravenna, Cassiodorus, Gregory of Tours are witnesses that the idea that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son was well established as part of the (Western) Church's faith, before Latin theologians began to concern themselves about the Spirit proceeds from the Son.\nPope Gregory I is usually counted as teaching the Spirit's procession from the Son, although Byzantine theologians, quoting from Greek translations of his work rather than the original, present him as a witness against it, and although he sometimes speaks of the Holy Spirit as proceeding from the Father without mentioning the Son. Siecienski says that, in view of the widespread acceptance by then that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, it would be strange if Gregory did not advocate the teaching, \"even if he did not understand the as later Latin theology would \u2013 that is, in terms of a 'double procession'.\"\n\"From the Father through the Son\".\nChurch Fathers also use the phrase \"from the Father through the Son\". Cyril of Alexandria, who undeniably several times states that the Holy Spirit issues from the Father the Son, also speaks of the Holy Spirit coming from the Father the Son, two different expressions that for him are complementary: the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father does not exclude the Son's mediation and the Son receives from the Father a participation in the Holy Spirit's coming. Cyril, in his ninth anathema against Nestorius, had stated that the Spirit was Christ's own Spirit, which led Theodoret of Cyrus to question whether Cyril was advocating the idea that \"the Spirit has his subsistence from the Son or through the Son\". For Theodoret this idea was both \"blasphemous and impious [...] for we believe the Lord who has said: 'the Spirit of Truth who proceeds from the Father...' \". Cyril denied that he held this teaching, leading Theodoret to confirm the orthodoxy of Cyril's trinitarian theology, since the Church had always taught that \"the Holy Spirit does not receive existence from or through the Son, but proceeds from the Father and is called the proprium of the Son because of his consubstantiality. The phrase \"from the Son or through the Son\" continued to be used by Cyril, albeit in light of the clarification. The Roman Catholic Church accepts both phrases, and considers that they do not affect the reality of the same faith and instead express the same truth in slightly different ways. The influence of Augustine of Hippo made the phrase \"proceeds from the Father through the Son\" popular throughout the West, but, while used also in the East, \"through the Son\" was later, according to Philip Schaff, dropped or rejected by some as being nearly equivalent to \"from the Son\" or \"and the Son\". Others spoke of the Holy Spirit proceeding \"from the Father\", as in the text of the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed, which \"did not state that the Spirit proceeds from the Father \".\nFirst Eastern opposition.\nThe first recorded objection by a representative of Eastern Christianity against the Western belief that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son occurred when Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople () made accusations against either Pope Theodore I () or Pope Martin I () for using the expression. Theodore I excommunicated Paul II in 647 for Monothelitism. In response to the attack by Paul, Maximus the Confessor, a Greek opponent of Monothelitism, declared that it was wrong to condemn the Roman use of \"and the Son\" because the Romans \"have produced the unanimous evidence of the Latin Fathers, and also of Cyril of Alexandria [...] On the basis of these texts, they have shown that they have not made the Son the cause of the Spirit \u2013 they know in fact that the Father is the only cause of the Son and the Spirit, the one by begetting and the other by procession \u2013 but that they have manifested the procession through him and have thus shown the unity and identity of the essence.\" He also indicated that the differences between the Latin and Greek languages were an obstacle to mutual understanding, since \"they cannot reproduce their idea in a language and in words that are foreign to them as they can in their mother-tongue, just as we too cannot do\".\nClaims of authenticity.\nAt the end of the 8th and the beginning of the 9th century, the Church of Rome was faced with an unusual challenge regarding the use of Filioque clause. Among the Church leaders in Frankish Kingdom of that time a notion was developing that Filioque clause was in fact an authentic part of the original Creed. Trying to deal with that problem and its potentially dangerous consequences, the Church of Rome found itself in the middle of a widening rift between its own Daughter-Church in Frankish Kingdom and Sister-Churches of the East. Popes of that time, Hadrian I and Leo III, had to face various challenges while trying to find solutions that would preserve the unity of the Church.\nFirst signs of the problems were starting to show by the end of the reign of Frankish king Pepin the Short (751\u2013768). Use of the clause in the Frankish Kingdom led to controversy with envoys of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine V at the Synod of Gentilly (767). As the practice of chanting the interpolated Latin at Mass spread in the West, the became a part of Latin liturgy throughout the Frankish Kingdom. The practice of chanting the Creed was adopted in Charlemagne's court by the end of the 8th century and spread through all of his realms, including some northern parts of Italy, but not to Rome, where its use was not accepted until 1014.\nSerious problems erupted in 787 after the Second Council of Nicaea when Charlemagne accused the Patriarch Tarasios of Constantinople of infidelity to the faith of the First Council of Nicaea, allegedly because he had not professed the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father \"and the Son\", but only \"through the Son\". Pope Adrian I rejected those accusations and tried to explain to the Frankish king that pneumatology of Tarasios was in accordance with the teachings of the holy Fathers. Surprisingly, efforts of the pope had no effect.\nThe true scale of the problem became evident during the following years. The Frankish view of the was emphasized again in the , composed around 791\u2013793. Openly arguing that the word was part of the Creed of 381, the authors of demonstrated not only the surprising lack of basic knowledge but also the lack of will to receive right advice and counsel from the Mother-Church in Rome. Frankish theologians reaffirmed the notion that the Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, and rejected as inadequate the teaching that the Spirit proceeds from the Father . That claim was both erroneous and dangerous for the preservation of the unity of the Church.\nIn those days, another theological problem appeared to be closely connected with the use of in the West. In the late 8th century, a controversy arose between Bishop Elipandus of Toledo and Beatus of Li\u00e9bana over the former's teaching (which has been called Spanish Adoptionism) that Christ in his humanity was the adoptive son of God. Elipandus was supported by Bishop Felix of Urgel. In 785, Pope Hadrian I condemned the teaching of Elipandus. In 791, Felix appealed to Charlemagne in defense of the Spanish Adoptionist teaching, sending him a tract outlining it. He was condemned at the Synod of Regensburg (792) and was sent to Pope Hadrian in Rome, where he made of profession of orthodox faith, but returned to Spain and there reaffirmed Adoptionism. Elipandus wrote to the bishops of the territories controlled by Charlemagne in defence of his teaching, which was condemned at the Council of Frankfurt (794) and at the Synod of Friuli (796). The controversy encouraged those who rejected Adoptionism to introduce into the liturgy the use of the Creed, with the , to profess belief that Christ was the Son from eternity, not adopted as a son at his baptism.\nAt the Synod of Friuli, Paulinus II of Aquileia stated that the insertion of in the 381 Creed of the First Council of Constantinople was no more a violation of the prohibition of new creeds than were the insertions into the 325 Creed of the First Council of Nicaea that were done by the First Council of Constantinople itself. What was forbidden, he said, was adding or removing something \"craftily [...] contrary to the sacred intentions of the fathers\", not a council's addition that could be shown to be in line with the intentions of the Fathers and the faith of the ancient Church. Actions such as that of the First Council of Contantinople were sometimes called for in order to clarify the faith and do away with heresies that appear. The views of Paulinus show that some advocates of Filioque clause were quite aware of the fact that it actually was not part of the Creed.\nPolitical events that followed additionally complicated the issue. According to John Meyendorff, and John Romanides the Frankish efforts to get new Pope Leo III to approve the addition of to the Creed were due to a desire of Charlemagne, who in 800 had been crowned in Rome as Emperor, to find grounds for accusations of heresy against the East. The Pope's refusal to approve the interpolation of the into the Creed avoided arousing a conflict between East and West about this matter. During his reign (), and for another two centuries, there was no Creed at all in the Roman rite Mass.\nReasons for the continuing refusal of the Frankish Church to adopt the positions of the Church of Rome on necessity of leaving Filioque outside of Creed remained unknown. In 808 or 809 apparent controversy arose in Jerusalem between the Greek monks of one monastery and the Frankish Benedictine monks of another: the Greeks reproached the latter for, among other things, singing the creed with the included. In response, the theology of the was expressed in the 809 local Council of Aachen (809).\nFaced with another endorsement of the Filioque, pope Leo III denied his approval and publicly posted the Creed in Rome without the Filioque, written in Greek and Latin on two silver plaques, in defense of the Orthodox Faith (810) stating his opposition to the addition of the into the Creed. Although Leo III did not disapprove the doctrine, the Pope strongly believed the clause should not be included into the Creed. In spite of the efforts of the Church of Rome, the acceptance of the Filioque clause in the Creed of the Frankish Church proved to be irreversible.\nPhotian controversy.\nAround 860 the controversy over the broke out in the course of the disputes between Patriarch Photius of Constantinople and Patriarch Ignatius of Constantinople. Pope Nicholas I contended that Patriarch Ignatios of Constantinople was deposed in 858 and Photius I raised to the patriarchal see in violation of ecclesiastical law and at a Roman synod held in April 863, he excommunicated Photius. In 867 Photius was Patriarch of Constantinople and issued an \"Encyclical to the Eastern Patriarchs\", and called a council in Constantinople in which he charged the Western Church with heresy and schism because of differences in practices, in particular for the and the authority of the Papacy. The situation had escalated from issues of jurisdiction and custom to include matters of dogma. This council declared Pope Nicholas anathema, excommunicated and deposed.\nPhotius excluded not only \"and the Son\" but also \"through the Son\" with regard to the eternal procession of the Holy Spirit: for him \"through the Son\" applied only to the temporal mission of the Holy Spirit (the sending in time). He maintained that the eternal procession of the Holy Spirit is \"from the Father \". This phrase was verbally a novelty, however, Eastern Orthodox theologians generally hold that in substance the phrase is only a reaffirmation of traditional teaching. Sergei Bulgakov, on the other hand, declared that Photius's doctrine itself \"represents a sort of novelty for the Eastern church\". Bulgakov writes: \"The Cappadocians expressed only one idea: the monarchy of the Father and, consequently, the procession of the Holy Spirit precisely from the Father. They never imparted to this idea, however, the exclusiveness that it acquired in the epoch of the Filioque disputes after Photius, in the sense of (from the Father alone)\"; Nichols summarized that, \"Bulgakov finds it amazing that with all his erudition Photius did not see that the 'through the Spirit' of Damascene and others constituted a different theology from his own, just as it is almost incomprehensible to find him trying to range the Western Fathers and popes on his Monopatrist side.\"\nPhotius's importance endured in regard to relations between East and West. He is recognized as a saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church and his line of criticism has often been echoed later, making reconciliation between East and West difficult.\nAt least three councils \u2013 Council of Constantinople (867), Fourth Council of Constantinople (Roman Catholic) (869), and Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox) (879) \u2013 were held in Constantinople over the actions of Emperor Michael III in deposing Ignatius and replacing him with Photius. The Council of Constantinople (867) was convened by Photius to address the question of Papal Supremacy over all of the churches and their patriarchs and the use of the .\nThe council of 867 was followed by the Fourth Council of Constantinople (Roman Catholic), in 869, which reversed the previous council and was promulgated by Rome. The Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox), in 879, restored Photius to his see. It was attended by Western legates Cardinal Peter of St Chrysogonus, Paul Bishop of Ancona and Eugene Bishop of Ostia who approved its canons, but it is unclear whether it was ever promulgated by Rome.\nAdoption in Latin liturgies.\nLatin liturgical use of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed with the added term spread between the 8th and 11th centuries.\nOnly in 1014, at the request of King Henry II of Germany (who was in Rome for his coronation as Holy Roman Emperor and was surprised by the different custom in force there) did Pope Benedict VIII, who owed to Henry II his restoration to the papal throne after usurpation by Antipope Gregory VI, have the Creed with the addition of , sung at Mass in Rome for the first time. In some other places was incorporated in the Creed even later: in parts of southern Italy after the Council of Bari in 1098 and at Paris seemingly not even by 1240, 34 years before the Second Council of Lyon defined that the Holy Spirit \"proceeds eternally from the Father and from the Son, not as from two principles but from a single principle, not by two spirations but by a single spiration\".\nSince then the phrase has been included in the Creed throughout the Latin Church except where Greek is used in the liturgy.\nIts adoption among the Eastern Catholic Churches (formerly known as Uniate churches) has been discouraged.\nEast\u2013West controversy.\nEastern opposition to the strengthened after the 11th century East\u2013West Schism. According to the synodal edict, a Latin anathema, in the excommunication of 1054, against the Greeks included: \"\" (\"as pneumatomachi and theomachi, they have cut from the Creed the procession of the holy Spirit from the Son\"). The Council of Constantinople, in a synodal edict, responded with anathemas against the Latins:\" (\"And besides all this, and quite unwilling to see that it is they claim that the Spirit proceeds from the Father, not [only], but also from the Son \u2013 as if they have no evidence of the evangelists of this, and if they do not have the dogma of the ecumenical council regarding this slander. For the Lord our God says, \"even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father (John 15:26)\". But parents say this new wickedness of the Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.\")\nTwo councils that were held to heal the break discussed the question.\nThe Second Council of Lyon (1274) accepted the profession of faith of Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos: \"We believe also the Holy Spirit, fully, perfectly and truly God, proceeding from the Father and the Son, fully equal, of the same substance, equally almighty and equally eternal with the Father and the Son in all things.\" and the Greek participants, including Patriarch Joseph I of Constantinople sang the Creed three times with the clause. Most Byzantine Christians feeling disgust and recovering from the Latin Crusaders' conquest and betrayal, refused to accept the agreement made at Lyon with the Latins. Michael VIII was excommunicated by Pope Martin IV in November 1281, and later died, after which Patriarch Joseph I's successor, Patriarch John XI of Constantinople, who had become convinced that the teaching of the Greek Fathers was compatible with that of the Latins, was forced to resign, and was replaced by Patriarch Gregory II of Constantinople, who was strongly of the opposite opinion.\nLyons II did not require those Christians to change the recitation of the creed in their liturgy.\nLyons II stated \"that the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father and the Son, not as from two principles, but one, not from two spirations but by only one,\" is \"the unchangeable and true doctrine of the orthodox Fathers and Doctors, both Latin and Greek.\" So, it \"condemn and disapprove those who deny that the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from Father and Son or who assert that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son as from two principles, not from one.\"\nThe local Orthodox Council of Constantinople (1285) was called in response to Lyons II and repudiated the union of the Churches, condemning the pro-Unionist patriarch John XI Beccus, and giving a more explicit condemnation of the \"Filioque\" than any earlier councils. It specifically condemned:\nAnother attempt at reunion was made at the 15th century Council of Florence, to which Emperor John VIII Palaiologos, Ecumenical Patriarch Joseph II of Constantinople, and other bishops from the East had gone in the hope of getting Western military aid against the looming Ottoman Empire. Thirteen public sessions held in Ferrara from 8 October to 13 December 1438 the question was debated without agreement. The Greeks held that any addition whatever, even if doctrinally correct, to the Creed had been forbidden by Ephesus I, while the Latins claimed that this prohibition concerned meaning, not words.\nDuring the Council of Florence in 1439, accord continued to be elusive, until the argument prevailed among the Greeks themselves that, though the Greek and the Latin saints expressed their faith differently, they were in agreement substantially, since saints cannot err in faith; and by 8 June the Greeks accepted the Latin statement of doctrine. Joseph II died on 10 June. A statement on the question was included in the decree of union, which was signed on 5 July 1439 and promulgated the next day \u2013 Mark of Ephesus was the only bishop not to sign the agreement.\nThe Eastern Church refused to consider the agreement reached at Florence binding, since the death of Joseph II had for the moment left it without a Patriarch of Constantinople. There was strong opposition to the agreement in the East, and when in 1453, 14 years after the agreement, the promised military aid from the West still had not arrived and Constantinople fell to the Turks, neither Eastern Christians nor their new rulers wished union between them and the West.\nCouncils of Jerusalem, AD 1583 and 1672.\nThe Synod of Jerusalem (1583) condemned those who do not believe the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone in essence, and from Father and Son in time. In addition, this synod re-affirmed adherence to the decisions of Nicaea I. The Synod of Jerusalem (1672) similarly re-affirmed procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father alone.\nReformation.\nAlthough the Protestant Reformation challenged a number of church doctrines, they accepted the without reservation. However, they did not have a polemical insistence on the Western view of the Trinity. In the second half of the 16th century, Lutheran scholars from the University of T\u00fcbingen initiated a dialogue with the Patriarch Jeremias II of Constantinople. The T\u00fcbingen Lutherans defended the arguing that, without it, \"the doctrine of the Trinity would lose its epistemological justification in the history of revelation.\" In the centuries that followed, the was considered by Protestant theologians to be a key component of the doctrine of the Trinity, although it was never elevated to being a pillar of Protestant theology. Zizioulas characterizes Protestants as finding themselves \"in the same confusion as those fourth century theologians who were unable to distinguish between the two sorts of procession, 'proceeding from' and 'sent by'.\"\nPresent position of various churches.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church holds, as a truth dogmatically defined since as far back as Pope Leo I in 447, who followed a Latin and Alexandrian tradition, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son. It rejects the notion that the Holy Spirit proceeds jointly and equally from two principles (Father and Son) and teaches dogmatically that \"the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father and the Son, not as from two principles but as from one single principle\". It holds that the Father, as the \"principle without principle\", is the first origin of the Spirit, but also that he, as Father of the only Son, is with the Son the single principle from which the Spirit proceeds.\nIt also holds that the procession of the Holy Spirit can be expressed as \"from the Father through the Son\". The agreement that brought about the 1595 Union of Brest expressly declared that those entering full communion with Rome \"should remain with that which was handed down to (them) in the Holy Scriptures, in the Gospel, and in the writings of the holy Greek Doctors, that is, that the Holy Spirit proceeds, not from two sources and not by a double procession, but from one origin, from the Father through the Son\".\nThe Catholic Church recognizes that the Creed, as confessed at the First Council of Constantinople, did not add \"and the Son\", when it spoke of the Holy Spirit as proceeding from the Father, and that this addition was admitted to the Latin liturgy between the 8th and 11th centuries. When quoting the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, as in the 2000 document \"Dominus Iesus\", it does not include \"Filioque\". It views as complementary the Eastern-tradition expression \"who proceeds from the Father\" (profession of which it sees as affirming that the Spirit comes from the Father through the Son) and the Western-tradition expression \"who proceeds from the Father and the Son\", with the Eastern tradition expressing firstly the Father's character as first origin of the Spirit, and the Western tradition giving expression firstly to the consubstantial communion between Father and Son.\nThe monarchy of the Father is a doctrine upheld not only by those who, like Photius, speak of a procession from the Father alone. It is also asserted by theologians who speak of a procession from the Father through the Son or from the Father and the Son. Examples cited by Siecienski include Bessarion, Maximus the Confessor, Bonaventure, and the Council of Worms (868), The same remark is made by J\u00fcrgen Moltmann. The Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity (PCPCU) also stated that not only the Eastern tradition, but also the Latin \"Filioque\" tradition \"recognize that the 'Monarchy of the Father' implies that the Father is the sole Trinitarian Cause () or Principle (\"\") of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\".\nThe Catholic Church recognizes that, in the Greek language, the term used in the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed (, \"proceeding\") to signify the proceeding of the Holy Spirit cannot appropriately be used with regard to the Son, but only with regard to the Father, a difficulty that does not exist in other languages. For this reason, even in the liturgy of Latin Church Catholics, it does not add the phrase corresponding to \"Filioque\" () to the Greek language text of the Creed containing the word . Even in languages other than Greek, it encourages Eastern Catholic Churches to omit the \"Filioque\" from their recitation of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, even in Eastern Catholic liturgies that previously included it.\nAnglicanism.\nThe 1978 and 1988 Lambeth Conferences advised the Anglican Communion to omit printing the \"Filioque\" in the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed. In 1993, a joint meeting of the Anglican Primates and Anglican Consultative Council, passed a resolution urging Anglican churches to comply with the request to print the liturgical Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed without the \"Filioque\" clause. The recommendation was not specifically renewed in the 1998 and 2008 Lambeth Conferences and has not been implemented.\nIn 1985 the General Convention of The Episcopal Church (USA) recommended that the \"Filioque\" clause should be removed from the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, if this were endorsed by the 1988 Lambeth Council. Accordingly, at its 1994 General Convention, the Episcopal Church reaffirmed its intention to remove the \"Filioque\" clause from the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed in the next revision of its Book of Common Prayer. The Episcopal Book of Common Prayer was last revised in 1979, and has not been revised since the resolution.\nThe Scottish Episcopal Church does not print the \"Filioque\" clause in its modern language liturgy (published 1982), though previous liturgies from 1929 and 1970, which have the \"Filioque\" remain authorised. The 1987 revision of the Scottish Liturgy of 1970 did not remove the Filioque clause, although it had already been omitted from the 1982 liturgy, promulgated five years earlier.\nProtestantism.\nAmong 20th-century Protestant theologians, Karl Barth was perhaps the staunchest defender of the \"Filioque\" doctrine. Barth was harshly critical of the ecumenical movement which advocated dropping the \"Filioque\" in order to facilitate reunification of the Christian churches. Barth's vigorous defence of the \"Filioque\" ran counter to the stance of many Protestant theologians of the latter half of the 20th century who favoured abandoning the use of the \"Filioque\" in the liturgy.\nThe Moravian Church has never used the \"Filioque\".\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThere has never been a specific conciliar statement in the Orthodox Church which defined the \"filioque\" as heresy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox interpretation is that the Holy Spirit originates, has his cause for existence or being (manner of existence) from the Father alone as \"One God, One Father\",\nLossky insisted that any notion of a double procession of the Holy Spirit from both the Father and the Son was incompatible with Eastern Orthodox theology. For Lossky, this incompatibility was so fundamental that \"whether we like it or not, the question of the procession of the Holy Spirit has been the sole dogmatic grounds of the separation of East and West\". Eastern Orthodox scholars who share Lossky's view include Dumitru St\u0103niloae, John Romanides, Christos Yannaras, and Michael Pomazansky. Sergei Bulgakov, however, was of the opinion that the \"Filioque\" did not represent an insurmountable obstacle to reunion of the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches.\nViews of Eastern Orthodox saints.\nAlthough Maximus the Confessor declared that it was wrong to condemn the Latins for speaking of the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son, the addition of the \"Filioque\" to the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed was condemned as heretical by other saints of the Eastern Orthodox Church, including Photius the Great, Gregory Palamas and Mark of Ephesus, sometimes referred to as the Three Pillars of Orthodoxy. However, the statement \"The Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son\" can be understood in an orthodox sense if it is clear from the context that \"procession from the Son\" refers to the sending forth of the Spirit \"in time\", not to an eternal, double procession within the Trinity itself which gives the Holy Spirit existence or being. Hence, in Eastern Orthodox thought, Maximus the Confessor justified the Western use of the \"Filioque\" in a context other than that of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed. and \"defended as a legitimate variation of the Eastern formula that the Spirit proceeds from the Father \"through\" the Son\". Saint Theophylact of Ohrid likewise maintained that the difference was linguistic in nature and not really theological, urging a spirit of conciliation on both sides over a matter of customs.\nAccording to Metropolitan Hierotheos (Vlachos) of Nafpaktos, an Eastern Orthodox tradition is that Gregory of Nyssa composed the section of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed referring to the Holy Spirit adopted by the Second Ecumenical Council at Constantinople in 381. Siecienski doubts that Gregory of Nyssa would have endorsed the addition of the \"Filioque\", as later understood in the West, into the Creed, notwithstanding that Gregory of Nyssa reasoned \"there is an eternal, and not simply economic, relationship of the Spirit to the Son\".\nEastern Orthodox view of Roman Catholic theology.\nEastern Orthodox theologians (e.g. Pomazansky) say that the Nicene Creed as a Symbol of Faith, as dogma, is to address and define church theology specifically the Orthodox Trinitarian understanding of God. In the hypostases of God as correctly expressed against the teachings considered outside the church. The Father hypostasis of the Nicene Creed is the origin of all. Eastern Orthodox theologians have stated that New Testament passages (often quoted by the Latins) speak of the economy rather than the ontology of the Holy Spirit, and that in order to resolve this conflict Western theologians made further doctrinal changes, including declaring all persons of the Trinity to originate in the essence of God (the heresy of Sabellianism). Eastern Orthodox theologians see this as teaching of philosophical speculation rather than from actual experience of God via \"theoria\".\nThe Father is the eternal, infinite and uncreated reality, that the Christ and the Holy Spirit are also eternal, infinite and uncreated, in that their origin is not in the \"ousia\" of God, but that their origin is in the hypostasis of God called the Father. The double procession of the Holy Spirit bears some resemblance to the teachings of Macedonius I of Constantinople and his sect called the Pneumatomachians in that the Holy Spirit is created by the Son and a servant of the Father and the Son. It was Macedonius' position that caused the specific wording of the section on the Holy Spirit by St Gregory of Nyssa in the finalized Nicene creed.\nThe following are some Roman Catholic dogmatic declarations of the \"Filioque\" which are in contention with Eastern Orthodoxy:\nIn the judgment of these Orthodox, the Roman Catholic Church is in fact teaching as a matter of Roman Catholic dogma that the Holy Spirit derives his origin and being (equally) from both the Father and the Son, making the \"Filioque\" a double procession..\nThey perceive the West as teaching through more than one type of theological \"Filioque\" a different origin and cause of the Holy Spirit; that through the dogmatic Roman Catholic \"Filioque\" the Holy Spirit is subordinate to the Father and the Son and not a free, independent and equal to the Father hypostasis that receives his uncreatedness from the origin of all things, the Father hypostasis. Trinity expresses the idea of message, messenger and revealer, or mind, word and meaning. Eastern Orthodox Christians believe in one God the Father, whose person is uncaused and unoriginate, who, because He is love and communion, always exists with His Word and Spirit.\nEastern Orthodox theology.\nIn Eastern Orthodox Christianity theology starts with the Father hypostasis, not the essence of God, since the Father is the God of the Old Testament. The Father is the origin of all things and this is the basis and starting point of the Orthodox trinitarian teaching of one God in Father, one God, of the essence of the Father (as the uncreated comes from the Father as this is what the Father is). In Eastern Orthodox theology, God's uncreatedness or being or essence in Greek is called \"ousia\". Jesus Christ is the Son (God Man) of the uncreated Father (God). The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the uncreated Father (God).\nGod has existences (hypostases) of being; this concept is translated as the word \"person\" in the West. Each hypostasis of God is a specific and unique existence of God. Each has the same essence (coming from the origin, without origin, Father (God) they are uncreated). Each specific quality that constitutes an hypostasis of God, is non-reductionist and not shared. The issue of ontology or being of the Holy Spirit is also complicated by the \"Filioque\" in that the Christology and uniqueness of the hypostasis of Jesus Christ would factor into the manifestation of the Holy Spirit. In that Jesus is both God and Man, which fundamentally changes the hypostasis or being of the Holy Spirit, as Christ would be giving to the Holy Spirit an origin or being that was both God the Father (Uncreated) and Man (createdness).\nThe immanence of the Trinity that was defined in the finalized Nicene Creed. The economy of God, as God expresses himself in reality (his energies) was not what the Creed addressed directly. The specifics of God's interrelationships of his existences, are not defined within the Nicene Creed. The attempt to use the Creed to explain God's energies by reducing God existences to mere energies (actualities, activities, potentials) could be perceived as the heresy of semi-Sabellianism by advocates of Personalism, according to Meyendorff. Eastern Orthodox theologians have complained about this problem in the Roman Catholic dogmatic teaching of \"actus purus\".\nModern theology.\nModern Orthodox theological scholarship is split, according to William La Due, between a group of scholars that hold to a \"strict traditionalism going back to Photius\" and other scholars \"not so adamantly opposed to the \"filioque\"\". The \"strict traditionalist\" camp is exemplified by the stance of Lossky who insisted that any notion of a double procession of the Holy Spirit from both the Father and the Son was incompatible with Orthodox theology. For Lossky, this incompatibility was so fundamental that, \"whether we like it or not, the question of the procession of the Holy Spirit has been the sole dogmatic grounds of the separation of East and West\". Bulgakov, however, was of the opinion that the \"Filioque\" did not represent an insurmountable obstacle to reunion of the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches, an opinion shared by .\nNot all Orthodox theologians share the view taken by Lossky, St\u0103niloae, Romanides and Pomazansky, who condemn the \"Filioque\". Kallistos Ware considers this the \"rigorist\" position within the Orthodox Church. Ware states that a more \"liberal\" position on this issue \"was the view of the Greeks who signed the act of union at Florence. It is a view also held by many Orthodox at the present time\". He writes that \"according to the 'liberal' view, the Greek and the Latin doctrines on the procession of the Holy Spirit may both alike be regarded as theologically defensible. The Greeks affirm that the Spirit proceeds from the Father \"through\" the Son, the Latins that He proceeds from the Father \"and\" from the Son; but when applied to the relationship between Son and Spirit, these two prepositions 'through' and 'from' amount to the same thing.\" The \"Encyclopedia of Christian Theology\" lists Bolotov, Paul Evdokimov, I. Voronov and S. Bulgakov as seeing the \"Filioque\" as a permissible theological opinion or \"theologoumenon\". Bolotov defined theologoumena as theological opinions \"of those who for every catholic are more than just theologians: they are the theological opinions of the holy fathers of the one undivided church\", opinions that Bolotov rated highly but that he sharply distinguished from dogmas.\nBulgakov wrote, in \"The Comforter\", that:\nKarl Barth considered that the view prevailing in Eastern Orthodoxy was that of Bolotov, who pointed out that the Creed does not deny the \"Filioque\" and who concluded that the question had not caused the division and could not constitute an absolute obstacle to intercommunion between the Eastern Orthodox and the Old Catholic Church. David Guretzki wrote, in 2009, that Bolotov's view is becoming more prevalent among Orthodox theologians; and he quotes Orthodox theologian Theodore Stylianopoulos as arguing that \"the theological use of the \"filioque\" in the West against Arian subordinationism is fully valid according to the theological criteria of the Eastern tradition\".\nYves Congar stated in 1954 that \"the greater number of the Orthodox say that the \"Filioque\" is not a heresy or even a dogmatic error but an admissible theological opinion, a 'theologoumenon; and he cited 12th century bishop Nicetas of Nicomedia; 19th century philosopher Vladimir Solovyov; and 20th century writers Bolotov, Florovsky, and Bulgakov.\nOriental Orthodox Churches.\nAll Oriental Orthodox Churches (Coptic, Syriac, Armenian, Ethiopian, Eritrean, Malankaran) use the original Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, without the Filioque clause.\nChurch of the East.\nTwo of the present-day churches derived from the Church of the East, the Assyrian Church of the East and the Ancient Church of the East, do not use \"and the Son\" when reciting the Nicene Creed. A third, the Chaldean Catholic Church, a \"sui iuris\" Eastern Catholic Church, in 2007 at the request of the Holy See, removed \"and the Son\" from its version of the Nicene Creed.\nRecent theological perspectives.\nLinguistic issues.\nWare suggests that the problem is of semantics rather than of basic doctrinal differences. The English Language Liturgical Consultation commented that \"those who strongly favour retention of the \"Filioque\" are often thinking of the Trinity as revealed and active in human affairs, whereas the original Greek text is concerned about relationships within the Godhead itself. As with many historic disputes, the two parties may not be discussing the same thing.\"\nIn 1995, the pointed out an important difference in meaning between the Greek verb and the Latin verb \"\", both of which are commonly translated as \"proceed\". It stated that the Greek verb indicates that the Spirit \"takes his origin from the Father\u00a0... in a principal, proper and immediate manner\", while the Latin verb, which corresponds rather to the verb in Greek, can be applied to proceeding even from a mediate channel. Therefore, (\"who proceeds\"), used in the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed to signify the proceeding of the Holy Spirit, cannot be appropriately used in the Greek language with regard to the Son, but only with regard to the Father, a difficulty that does not exist in Latin and other languages.\nMetropolitan John Zizioulas, while maintaining the explicit Orthodox position of the Father as the single origin and source of the Holy Spirit, declared that shows positive signs of reconciliation. Zizioulas states: \"Closely related to the question of the single cause is the problem of the exact meaning of the Son's involvement in the procession of the Spirit. Gregory of Nyssa explicitly admits a 'mediating' role of the Son in the procession of the Spirit from the Father. Is this role to be expressed with the help of the preposition (through) the Son (), as Maximus and other Patristic sources seem to suggest?\" Zizioulas continues: \"The Vatican statement notes that this is 'the basis that must serve for the continuation of the current theological dialogue between Catholic and Orthodox'. I would agree with this, adding that the discussion should take place in the light of the 'single cause' principle to which I have just referred.\" Zizioulas adds that this \"constitutes an encouraging attempt to clarify the basic aspects of the 'Filioque' problem and show that a rapprochement between West and East on this matter is eventually possible\".\nSome Orthodox reconsideration of the \"Filioque\".\nRussian theologian Boris Bolotov asserted in 1898 that the \"Filioque\", like Photius's \"from the Father \"alone\"\", was a permissible theological opinion (a theologoumenon, not a dogma) that cannot be an absolute impediment to reestablishment of communion. Bolotov's thesis was supported by Orthodox theologians Bulgakov, Paul Evdokimov and I. Voronov, but was rejected by Lossky.\nIn 1986, Theodore Stylianopoulos provided an extensive, scholarly overview of the contemporary discussion. Ware said that he had changed his mind and had concluded that \"the problem is more in the area of semantics and different emphases than in any basic doctrinal differences\": \"the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone\" and \"the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son\" may \"both\" have orthodox meanings if the words translated \"proceeds\" actually have different meanings. For some Orthodox, then, the \"Filioque\", while still a matter of conflict, would not impede full communion of the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches if other issues were resolved. But 19th century Russian Slavophile theologian Aleksey Khomyakov considered the \"Filioque\" as an expression of formalism, rationalism, pride and lack of love for other Christians, and that it is in flagrant contravention of the words of Christ in the Gospel, has been specifically condemned by the Orthodox Church, and remains a fundamental heretical teaching which divides East and West.\nRomanides too, while personally opposing the \"Filioque\", stated that Constantinople I was not ever interpreted \"as a condemnation\" of the doctrine \"outside the Creed, since it did not teach that the Son is 'cause' or 'co-cause' of the existence of the Holy Spirit. This could not be added to the Creed where 'procession' means 'cause' of existence of the Holy Spirit.\"\nInclusion in the Nicene Creed.\nEastern Orthodox Christians object that, even if the teaching of the \"Filioque\" can be defended, its medieval interpretation and unilateral interpolation into the Creed is anti-canonical and unacceptable. \"The Catholic Church acknowledges the conciliar, ecumenical, normative and irrevocable value, as expression of the one common faith of the Church and of all Christians, of the Symbol professed in Greek at Constantinople in 381 by the Second Ecumenical Council. No profession of faith peculiar to a particular liturgical tradition can contradict this expression of the faith taught and professed by the undivided Church.\" The Catholic Church allows liturgical use of the Apostles' Creed as well of the Nicene Creed, and sees no essential difference between the recitation in the liturgy of a creed with orthodox additions and a profession of faith outside the liturgy such that of Patriarch Tarasios of Constantinople, who developed the Nicene Creed with an addition as follows: \"the Holy Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father \"through the Son\"\". It sees the addition of \"and the Son\" in the context of the Latin ' (who proceeds from the Father) as an elucidation of the faith expressed by the Church Fathers, since the verb ' signifies \"the communication of the consubstantial divinity from the Father to the Son and from the Father, through and with the Son, to the Holy Spirit\".\nMost Oriental Orthodox churches have not added the \"Filoque\" to their creeds but the Armenian Apostolic Church has added elucidations to the Nicene Creed. Another change made to the text of the Nicene Creed by both the Latins and the Greeks is to use the singular \"I believe\" in place of the plural \"we believe\", while all the Churches of Oriental Orthodoxy, not only the Armenian, but also the Coptic Orthodox Church, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the Malankara Orthodox Church, and the Syriac Orthodox Church, have on the contrary preserved the \"we believe\" of the original text.\nFocus on Saint Maximus as a point of mutual agreement.\nRecently, theological debate about the \"Filioque\" has focused on the writings of Maximus the Confessor. Siecienski writes that \"Among the hundreds of figures involved in the filioque debates throughout the centuries, Maximus the Confessor enjoys a privileged position.\" During the lengthy proceedings at Ferrara-Florence, the Orthodox delegates presented a text from Maximus the Confessor that they felt could provide the key to resolving the theological differences between East and West.\nThe states that, according to Maximus, the phrase \"and from the Son\" does not contradict the Holy Spirit's procession from the Father as first origin (\u1f10\u03ba\u03c0\u03cc\u03c1\u03b5\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2), since it concerns only the Holy Spirit's coming (in the sense of the Latin word \"\" and Cyril of Alexandria's ) from the Son in a way that excludes any idea of subordinationism.\nOrthodox theologian and Metropolitan of Pergamon, John Zizioulas, wrote that for Maximus the Confessor \"the Filioque was not heretical because its intention was to denote not the () but the () of the Spirit\".\nZizioulas also wrote that \"Maximus the Confessor insisted, however, in defence of the Roman use of the Filioque, the decisive thing in this defence lies precisely in the point that in using the Filioque the Romans do not imply a \"cause\" other than the Father. The notion of \"cause\" seems to be of special significance and importance in the Greek Patristic argument concerning the Filioque. If Roman Catholic theology would be ready to admit that the Son in no way constitutes a \"cause\" (aition) in the procession of the Spirit, this would bring the two traditions much closer to each other with regard to the Filioque.\" This is precisely what Maximus said of the Roman view, that \"they have shown that they have not made the Son the cause of the Spirit \u2013 they know in fact that the Father is the only cause of the Son and the Spirit, the one by begetting and the other by procession\".\nThe upholds the monarchy of the Father as the \"sole Trinitarian Cause [\"aitia\"] or principle [\"principium\"] of the Son and the Holy Spirit\". While the Council of Florence proposed the equivalency of the two terms \"cause\" and \"principle\" and therefore implied that the Son is a cause (\"aitia\") of the subsistence of the Holy Spirit, the distinguishes \"between what the Greeks mean by 'procession' in the sense of taking origin from, applicable only to the Holy Spirit relative to the Father (\"ek tou Patros ekporeuomenon\"), and what the Latins mean by 'procession' as the more common term applicable to both Son and Spirit (\"\"; \"ek tou Patros kai tou Huiou proion\"). This preserves the monarchy of the Father as the sole origin of the Holy Spirit while simultaneously allowing for an intratrinitarian relation between the Son and Holy Spirit that the document defines as 'signifying the communication of the consubstantial divinity from the Father to the Son and from the Father through and with the Son to the Holy Spirit'.\"\nRoman Catholic theologian Avery Dulles wrote that the Eastern fathers were aware of the currency of the \"Filioque\" in the West and did not generally regard it as heretical: Some, such as Maximus the Confessor, \"defended it as a legitimate variation of the Eastern formula that the Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son\".\nPomazansky and Romanides hold that Maximus' position does not defend the actual way the Roman Catholic Church justifies and teaches the \"Filioque\" as dogma for the whole church. While accepting as a legitimate and complementary expression of the same faith and reality the teaching that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son, Maximus held strictly to the teaching of the Eastern Church that \"the Father is the only cause of the Son and the Spirit\": and wrote a special treatise about this dogma. The Roman Catholic Church cites Maximus as in full accord with the teaching on the \"Filioque\" that it proposes for the whole Church as a dogma that is in harmony with the formula \"from the Father through the Son\", for he explained that, by \"ekporeusis\", \"the Father is the sole cause of the Son and the Spirit\", but that, by , the Greek verb corresponding to \"\" (proceed) in Latin, the Spirit comes through the Son. Later again the Council of Florence, in 1438, declared that the Greek formula \"from the Father through the Son\" was equivalent to the Latin \"from the Father and the Son\", not contradictory, and that those who used the two formulas \"were aiming at the same meaning in different words\".\n\"Per Filium\".\nRecently, some Orthodox theologians have proposed the substitution of the formula \"ex Patre per Filium\" / \"\u03b5\u03ba \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5 \u03a0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 \u03b4\u03b9\u03b1 \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5 \u03a5\u03b9\u03bf\u03cd\" (from the Father through the Son) instead of \"ex Patre Filioque\" (from the Father and the Son).\nRecent attempts at reconciliation.\nStarting in the latter half of the nineteenth century, ecumenical efforts have gradually developed more nuanced understandings of the issues underlying the \"Filioque\" controversy and worked to remove them as an obstruction to Christian unity. Lossky insists that the \"Filioque\" is so fundamentally incompatible with Orthodox Christianity as to be the central issue dividing the two churches.\nWestern churches have arrived at the position that, although the \"Filioque\" is doctrinally sound, the way that it was inserted into the Nicene Creed has created an unnecessary obstacle to ecumenical dialogue. Thus, without abandoning the \"Filioque\", some Western churches have come to accept that it could be omitted from the Creed without violating any core theological principles. This accommodation on the part of Western Churches has the objective of allowing both East and West to once again share a common understanding of the Creed as the traditional and fundamental statement of the Christian faith.\nCatholic Church.\nPopes John Paul II and Benedict XVI have recited the Nicene Creed jointly with Patriarchs Demetrius I and Bartholomew I in Greek without the \"Filioque\" clause.\nOld Catholic Church.\nImmediately after the Old Catholic Church separated from the Catholic Church in 1871, its theologians initiated contact with the Orthodox Church. In 1874\u201375, representatives of the two churches held \"union conferences\" in Bonn with theologians of the Anglican Communion and the Lutheran Church in attendance in an unofficial capacity. The conferences discussed a number of issues including the filioque controversy. From the outset, Old Catholic theologians agreed with the Orthodox position that the \"Filioque\" had been introduced in the West in an unacceptably non-canonical way. It was at these Bonn conferences that the Old Catholics became the first Western church to omit the \"Filioque\" from the Nicene Creed.\nAnglican Communion.\nThree Lambeth Conferences (1888, 1978 and 1988) have recommended that the \"Filioque\" be dropped from the Nicene Creed by churches that belong to the Anglican Communion.\nThe 1930 Lambeth Conference initiated formal theological dialogue between representatives of the Anglican and Orthodox churches. In 1976, the Agreed Statement of the Anglican-Orthodox Joint Doctrinal Commission recommended that the \"Filioque\" should be omitted from the Creed because its inclusion had been effected without the authority of an Ecumenical Council.\nIn 1994, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church (US) resolved that the \"Filioque\" should be deleted from the Nicene Creed in the next edition of the Prayer Book. The enthronement ceremonies of four recent archbishops of Canterbury (Robert Runcie, George Carey, Rowan Williams, Justin Welby) included recitations of the Nicene Creed that omitted the \"Filioque\"; this has been considered to have been \"a gesture of friendship toward Orthodox guests and their Communions\".\nAt the end of October 2017 theologians from the Anglican Communion and Oriental Orthodox Churches signed an agreement on the Holy Spirit. This is the culmination of discussions which began in 2015. The statement of agreement confirms the omission of the Filioque clause.\nWorld Council of Churches.\nIn 1979, a study group of the World Council of Churches examined the \"Filioque\" question and recommended that \"the original form of the Creed, without the \"Filioque\", should everywhere be recognized as the normative one and restored, so that the whole Christian people may be able ... to confess their common faith in the Holy Spirit\". However, nearly a decade later, the WCC lamented that very few member churches had implemented this recommendation.\nJoint statement of Catholic and Eastern Orthodox theologians.\nThe \"Filioque\" was discussed at the 62nd meeting of the North American Orthodox\u2013Catholic Theological Consultation, in 2002. As a result of these contemporary discussions between both churches, it has been suggested that the orthodox could accept an \"economic\" filioque that states that the Holy Spirit, who originates in the Father alone, was sent to the Church \"through the Son\" (as the Paraclete), but it would not be the official orthodox doctrine, but what the Fathers called a theologoumenon, a theological opinion.\nIn October 2003, the Consultation issued an agreed statement, \"The Filioque: a Church-dividing issue?\", which provides an extensive review of Scripture, history, and theology. The recommendations include:\nIn the judgment of the consultation, the question of the \"Filioque\" is no longer a \"Church-dividing\" issue, which would impede full reconciliation and full communion. It is for the bishops of the Catholic and Orthodox Churches to review this work and to make whatever decisions would be appropriate.\nSummary.\nWhile the Filioque doctrine was traditional in the West, being declared dogmatically in 447 by Pope Leo I, the Pope whose \"Tome\" was approved at the Council of Chalcedon, its inclusion in the Creed appeared in the anti-Arian situation of 7th-century Spain. However, this dogma was never accepted in the East. The \"Filioque\", included in the Creed by certain anti-Arian councils in Spain, was a means to affirm the full divinity of the Son in relation to both the Father and the Spirit.\nA similar anti-Arian emphasis also strongly influenced the development of the liturgy in the East, for example, in promoting prayer to \"Christ Our God\", an expression which also came to find a place in the West, where, largely as a result of \"the Church's reaction to Teutonic Arianism\", Christ our God' ... gradually assumes precedence over 'Christ our brother. In this case, a common adversary, namely Arianism, had profound, far-reaching effects, in the orthodox reaction in both East and West.\nChurch politics, authority conflicts, ethnic hostility, linguistic misunderstanding, personal rivalry, forced conversions, large scale wars, political intrigue, unfilled promises and secular motives all combined in various ways to divide East and West.\nThe doctrine expressed by the phrase in Latin (in which the word \"procedit\" that is linked with \"Filioque\" does not have exactly the same meaning and overtones as the word used in Greek) is definitively upheld by the Western Church, having been dogmatically declared by Leo I, and upheld by councils at Lyon and Florence that the Western Church recognizes as ecumenical, by the unanimous witness of the Latin Church Fathers (as Maximus the Confessor acknowledged) and even by Popes who, like Leo III, opposed insertion of the word into the Creed.\nThat the doctrine is heretical is something that not all Orthodox now insist on. According to Ware, many Orthodox (whatever may be the doctrine and practice of the Eastern Orthodox Church itself) hold that, in broad outline, to say the Spirit proceeds from the Father \"and\" the Son amounts to the same thing as to say that the Spirit proceeds from the Father \"through\" the Son, a view accepted also by the Greeks who signed the act of union at the Council of Florence. For others, such as Bolotov and his disciples, the \"Filioque\" can be considered a Western \"theologoumenon\", a theological opinion of Church Fathers that falls short of being a dogma. Bulgakov also stated: \"There is no dogma of the relation of the Holy Spirit to the Son and therefore particular opinions on this subject are not heresies but merely dogmatic hypotheses, which have been transformed into heresies by the schismatic spirit that has established itself in the Church and that eagerly exploits all sorts of liturgical and even cultural differences.\""}
{"id": "11112", "revid": "7254364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11112", "title": "FIPS", "text": "FIPS or Fips may refer to:"}
{"id": "11113", "revid": "1280218634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11113", "title": "Federal Information Processing Standards", "text": "The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) of the United States are a set of publicly announced standards that the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed for use in computer situs of non-military United States government agencies and contractors. FIPS standards establish requirements for ensuring computer security and interoperability, and are intended for cases in which suitable industry standards do not already exist. AIR FIPS specifications are modified versions of standards the technical communities use, such as the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).\nSpecific areas of FIPS standardization.\nThe U.S. government has developed various FIPS specifications to standardize a number of topics including:\nData security standards.\nSome FIPS standards are related to the security of data processing systems. Some of these include the use of key escrow systems.\nWithdrawal of geographic codes.\nSome examples of FIPS Codes for geographical areas include FIPS 10-4 for country codes or region codes and FIPS 5-2 for state codes. These codes were similar to or comparable with, but not the same as, ISO 3166, or the NUTS standard of the European Union. In 2002, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) withdrew several geographic FIPS code standards, including those for countries (FIPS 10-4), U.S. states (FIPS 5-2), and counties (FIPS 6-4). These are to be replaced by ISO 3166 and INCITS standards 38 and 31, respectively. Some of the codes maintain the previous numerical system, particularly for states.\nIn 2008, NIST withdrew the FIPS 55-3 database. This database included 5-digit numeric place codes for cities, towns, and villages, or other centers of population in the United States. The codes were assigned alphabetically to places within each state, and as a result changed frequently in order to maintain the alphabetical sorting. NIST replaced these codes with the more permanent GNIS Feature ID, maintained by the U.S. Board on Geographic Names. The GNIS database is the official geographic names repository database for the United States, and is designated the only source of geographic names and locative attributes for use by the agencies of the Federal Government. FIPS 8-6 \"Metropolitan Areas\" and 9-1 \"Congressional Districts of the U.S.\" were also withdrawn in 2008, to be replaced with INCITS standards 454 and 455, respectively.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau used FIPS place codes database to identify legal and statistical entities for county subdivisions, places, and American Indian areas, Alaska Native areas, or Hawaiian home lands when they needed to present census data for these areas.\nIn response to the NIST decision, the Census Bureau is in the process of transitioning over to the GNIS Feature ID, which will be completed after the 2010 census. Until then, previously issued FIPS place codes, renamed \"Census Code\", will continue to be used, with the Census bureau assigning new codes as needed for their internal use during the transition."}
{"id": "11114", "revid": "49268699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11114", "title": "Fiqh", "text": "Fiqh (; ) is Islamic jurisprudence. \"Fiqh\" is often described as the style of human understanding and practices of the sharia; that is, human understanding of the divine Islamic law as revealed in the Quran and the sunnah (the teachings and practices of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and his companions). Fiqh expands and develops Shariah through interpretation (\"ijtihad\") of the Quran and \"Sunnah\" by Islamic jurists (\"ulama\") and is implemented by the rulings (\"fatwa\") of jurists on questions presented to them. Thus, whereas \"sharia\" is considered immutable and infallible by Muslims, \"fiqh\" is considered fallible and changeable. \"Fiqh\" deals with the observance of rituals, morals and social legislation in Islam as well as economic and political system. In the modern era, there are four prominent schools (\"madh'hab\") of \"fiqh\" within Sunni practice, plus two (or three) within Shi'a practice. A person trained in \"fiqh\" is known as a \"faq\u012bh\" (: \"fuqaha\").\nFiguratively, \"fiqh\" means knowledge about Islamic legal rulings from their sources. Deriving religious rulings from their sources requires the \"mujtahid\" (an individual who exercises \"ijtihad\") to have a deep understanding in the different discussions of jurisprudence.\nThe studies of \"fiqh\", are traditionally divided into \"U\u1e63\u016bl al-fiqh\" (principles of Islamic jurisprudence, lit. the roots of fiqh, alternatively transliterated as \"Usool al-fiqh\"), the methods of legal interpretation and analysis; and \"Fur\u016b\u02bf al-fiqh\" (lit. the branches of fiqh), the elaboration of rulings on the basis of these principles. \"Fur\u016b\u02bf al-fiqh\" is the product of the application of \"U\u1e63\u016bl al-fiqh\" and the total product of human efforts at understanding the divine will. A \"hukm\" (: \"a\u1e25k\u0101m\") is a particular ruling in a given case.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"fiqh\" is an Arabic term meaning \"deep understanding\" or \"full comprehension\". Technically it refers to the body of Islamic law extracted from detailed Islamic sources (which are studied in the principles of Islamic jurisprudence) and the process of gaining knowledge of Islam through jurisprudence. The historian Ibn Khaldun describes \"fiqh\" as \"knowledge of the rules of God which concern the actions of persons who own themselves connected to obey the law respecting what is required (\"wajib\"), sinful (\"haraam\"), recommended (\"mand\u016bb\"), disapproved (\"makr\u016bh\"), or neutral (\"mubah\")\". This definition is consistent amongst the jurists.\nIn Modern Standard Arabic, \"fiqh\" has also come to mean Islamic jurisprudence. It is not thus possible to speak of Chief Justice John Roberts as an expert in the common law \"fiqh\" of the United States, or of Egyptian legal scholar Abd El-Razzak El-Sanhuri as an expert in the civil law \"fiqh\" of Egypt.\nHistory.\nAccording to Sunni Islamic history, Sunni law followed a chronological path of:\nThe commands and prohibitions chosen by God were revealed through the agency of the Prophet in both the Quran and the Sunnah (words, deeds, and examples of the Prophet passed down as hadith). \nThe first Muslims (the Sahabah or Companions) heard and obeyed, and passed this essence of Islam to succeeding generations (\"Tabi'un\" and \"Tabi' al-Tabi'in\" or successors/followers and successors of successors), as Muslims and Islam spread from West Arabia to the conquered lands north, east, and west, where it was systematized and elaborated. \nThe history of Islamic jurisprudence is \"customarily divided into eight periods\":\nThe formative period of Islamic jurisprudence stretches back to the time of the early Muslim communities. During this period, jurists were more concerned with issues of authority and teaching than with theory and methodology.\nProgress in theory and methodology happened with the coming of the early Muslim jurist Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafi`i (767\u2013820), who codified the basic principles of Islamic jurisprudence in his book \"ar-Ris\u0101lah\". The book details the four roots of law (Qur'an, sunnah, \"ijma\", and \"qiyas\") while specifying that the primary Islamic texts (the Qur'an and the hadith) be understood according to objective rules of interpretation derived from scientific study of the Arabic language.\nSecondary sources of law were developed and refined over the subsequent centuries, consisting primarily of juristic preference (\"istihsan\"), laws of the previous prophets (\"shara man qablana\"), continuity (\"istishab\"), extended analogy (\"maslaha mursala\"), blocking the means (\"sadd al-dhari'ah\"), local customs (\"urf\"), and sayings of a companion of the Prophet (\"qawl al-sahabi\").\nDiagram of early scholars.\nThe Quran set the rights, responsibilities, and rules for people and societies to adhere to, such as dealing in interest. Muhammad then provided an example, which is recorded in the hadith books, showing people how he practically implemented these rules in a society. After the passing of Muhammad, there was a need for jurists, to decide on new legal matters where there is no such ruling in the Quran or the hadith, example of Muhammad regarding a similar case.\nIn the years proceeding Muhammad, the community in Madina continued to use the same rules. People were familiar with the practice of Muhammad and therefore continued to use the same rules.\nThe scholars appearing in the diagram below were taught by Muhammad's companions, many of whom settled in Madina. \"Muwatta\" by Malik ibn Anas was written as a consensus of the opinion, of these scholars. \"Muwatta\" by Malik ibn Anas quotes 13 hadiths from Imam Jafar al-Sadiq.\nAisha also taught her nephew Urwah ibn Zubayr. He then taught his son Hisham ibn Urwah, who was the main teacher of Malik ibn Anas whose views many Sunni follow and also taught by Jafar al-Sadiq. Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, Hisham ibn Urwah and Muhammad al-Baqir taught Zayd ibn Ali, Jafar al-Sadiq, Abu Hanifa, and Malik ibn Anas.\nImam Jafar al-Sadiq, Imam Abu Hanifa and Malik ibn Anas worked together in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in Medina. Along with Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, Muhammad al-Baqir, Zayd ibn Ali and over 70 other leading jurists and scholars.\nAl-Shafi\u2018i was taught by Malik ibn Anas. Ahmad ibn Hanbal was taught by Al-Shafi\u2018i. Muhammad al-Bukhari travelled everywhere collecting hadith and his father Ismail ibn Ibrahim was a student of Malik ibn Anas.\nIn the books actually written by these original jurists and scholars, there are very few theological and judicial differences between them. Imam Ahmad rejected the writing down and codifying of the religious rulings he gave. They knew that they might have fallen into error in some of their judgements and stated this clearly. They never introduced their rulings by saying, \"Here, this judgement is the judgement of God and His prophet.\" There is also very little text actually written down by Jafar al-Sadiq himself. They all give priority to the Qur'an and the hadith (the practice of Muhammad). They felt that the Quran and the Hadith, the example of Muhammad provided people with almost everything they needed. \"This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My favor upon you and have approved for you Islam as religion\" (Qur'an 5:3).\nThese scholars did not distinguish between each other. They were not Sunni or Shia. They felt that they were following the religion of Abraham as described in the Quran \"Say: Allah speaks the truth; so follow the religion of Abraham, the upright one. And he was not one of the polytheists\" (Qur'an 3:95).\nMost of the differences are regarding Sharia laws devised through Ijtihad where there is no such ruling in the Quran or the hadiths of Islamic prophet Muhammad regarding a similar case. As these jurists went to new areas, they were pragmatic and continued to use the same ruling as was given in that area during pre-Islamic times, if the population felt comfortable with it, it was just and they used Ijtihad to deduce that it did not conflict with the Quran or the Hadith. As explained in the \"Muwatta\" by Malik ibn Anas. This made it easier for the different communities to integrate into the Islamic State and assisted in the quick expansion of the Islamic State.\nTo reduce the divergence, ash-Shafi'i proposed giving priority to the Qur'an and the Hadith (the practice of Muhammad) and only then look at the consensus of the Muslim jurists (\"ijma\") and analogical reasoning (\"qiyas\"). This then resulted in jurists like Muhammad al-Bukhari dedicating their lives to the collection of the correct hadith, in books like Sahih al-Bukhari (Sahih translates as authentic or correct). They also felt that Muhammad's judgement was more impartial and better than their own.\nThese original jurists and scholars also acted as a counterbalance to the rulers. When they saw injustice, all these scholars spoke out against it. As the state expanded outside Madina, the rights of the different communities, as they were constituted in the Constitution of Medina still applied. The Quran also gave additional rights to the citizens of the state and these rights were also applied. Ali, Hassan and Husayn ibn Ali gave their allegiance to the first three caliphs because they abided by these conditions. Later Ali the fourth caliph wrote in a letter \"I did not approach the people to get their oath of allegiance but they came to me with their desire to make me their Amir (ruler). I did not extend my hands towards them so that they might swear the oath of allegiance to me but they themselves extended their hands towards me.\" But later as fate would have it (Predestination in Islam) when Yazid I, an Umayyad ruler took power, Husayn ibn Ali the grandson of Muhammad felt that it was a test from God for him and his duty to confront him. Then Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr's cousin confronted the Umayyad rulers after Husayn ibn Ali was betrayed by the people of Kufa and killed by Syrian Roman Army now under the control of the Yazid I. Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr then took on the Umayyads and expelled their forces from Hijaz and Iraq. But then his forces were depleted in Iraq, trying to stop the Khawarij. The Umayyads then moved in. After a lengthy campaign, in his last hour Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr asked his mother Asma' bint Abu Bakr the daughter of Abu Bakr the first caliph for advice. Asma' bint Abu Bakr replied to her son, she said: \"You know better in your own self, that if you are upon the truth and you are calling towards the truth go forth, for people more honourable than you have been killed and if you are not upon the truth, then what an evil son you are and you have destroyed yourself and those who are with you. If you say, that if you are upon the truth and you will be killed at the hands of others, then you will not truly be free.\" Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr left and was later also killed and crucified by the Syrian Roman Army now under the control of the Umayyads and led by Hajjaj. Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr the son of Abu Bakr the first caliph and raised by Ali the fourth caliph was also killed by the Umayyads. Aisha then raised and taught her son Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr who later taught his grandson Jafar al-Sadiq.\nDuring the early Umayyad period, there was more community involvement. The Quran and Muhammad's example was the main source of law after which the community decided. If it worked for the community, was just and did not conflict with the Quran and the example of Muhammad, it was accepted. This made it easier for the different communities, with Roman, Persian, Central Asia and North African backgrounds to integrate into the Islamic State and that assisted in the quick expansion of the Islamic State. The scholars in Madina were consulted on the more complex judicial issues. The Sharia and the official more centralized schools of fiqh developed later, during the time of the Abbasids.\nComponents.\nThe sources of Sharia in order of importance are\n&lt;br&gt;Primary sources\nSecondary sources&lt;br&gt;\nMajority of Sunni Muslims view \"Qiyas\" as a central Pillar of \"Ijtihad\". On the other hand; Zahirites, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Bukhari, early Hanbalites, etc. rejected \"Qiyas\" amongst the Sunnis. Similarly, the \"Shi\u2019a\" jurists almost unanimously reject both pure reason and analogical reason; viewing both these methods as subjective.\nThe Qur'an gives clear instructions on many issues, such as how to perform the ritual purification (') before the obligatory daily prayers ('). On other issues, for example, the Qur'an states one needs to engage in daily prayers (') and fast (') during the month of Ramadan but further instructions and details on how to perform these duties can be found in the traditions of Muhammad, so Qur'an and Sunnah are in most cases the basis for (\"\").\nSome topics are without precedent in Islam's early period. In those cases, Muslim jurists (') try to arrive at conclusions by other means. Sunni jurists use historical consensus of the community ('); a majority in the modern era also use analogy (') and weigh the harms and benefits of new topics ('), and a plurality utilizes juristic preference ('). The conclusions arrived at with the aid of these additional tools constitute a wide array of laws, and its application is called fiqh. Thus, in contrast to the \"sharia\", \"fiqh\" is not regarded as sacred and the schools of thought have differing views on its details, without viewing other conclusions as sacrilegious. This division of interpretation in more detailed issues has resulted in different schools of thought (').\nThis wider concept of Islamic jurisprudence is the source of a range of laws in different topics that guide Muslims in everyday life.\nComponent categories.\nIslamic jurisprudence (\"fiqh\") covers two main areas:\nThese types of rules can also fall into two groups:\nRules in relation to actions (\"'amaliyya\" \u2014 \u0639\u0645\u0644\u064a\u0629) or \"decision types\" comprise:\nRules in relation to circumstances (\"wadia\"') comprise:\nMethodologies of jurisprudence.\nThe modus operandi of the Muslim jurist is known as \"usul al-fiqh\" (\"principles of jurisprudence\").\nThere are different approaches to the methodology used in jurisprudence to derive Islamic rulings from the primary sources of \"sharia\" (Islamic law). The main methodologies are those of the Sunni, Shi'a and Ibadi denominations. While both Sunni and Shi'ite (Shia) are divided into smaller sub-schools, the differences among the Shi'ite schools is considerably greater. Ibadites only follow a single school without divisions.\nWhile using court decisions as legal precedents and case law are central to Western law, the importance of the institution of fatawa (non-binding answers by Islamic legal scholars to legal questions) has been called \"central to the development\" of Islamic jurisprudence. This is in part because of a \"vacuum\" in the other source of Islamic law, \"qada`\" (legal rulings by state appointed Islamic judges) after the fall of the last caliphate the Ottoman Empire. While the practice in Islam dates back to the time of Muhammad, according to at least one source (Muhammad El-Gamal), it is \"modeled after the Roman system of \"responsa\",\" and gives the questioner \"decisive primary-mover advantage in choosing the question and its wording.\"\nEach school (\"madhhab\") reflects a unique \"urf\" or culture (a cultural practice that was influenced by traditions), that the classical jurists themselves lived in, when rulings were made. Some suggest that the discipline of \"isnad\", which developed to validate \"hadith\" made it relatively easy to record and validate also the rulings of jurists. This, in turn, made them far easier to imitate (\"taqlid\") than to challenge in new contexts. The argument is, the schools have been more or less frozen for centuries, and reflect a culture that simply no longer exists. Traditional scholars hold that religion is there to regulate human behavior and nurture people's moral side and since human nature has not fundamentally changed since the beginning of Islam a call to modernize the religion is essentially one to relax all laws and institutions.\nEarly \"shariah\" had a much more flexible character, and some modern Muslim scholars believe that it should be renewed, and that the classical jurists should lose special status. This would require formulating a new fiqh suitable for the modern world, e.g. as proposed by advocates of the Islamization of knowledge, which would deal with the modern context. This modernization is opposed by most conservative \"ulema\". Traditional scholars hold that the laws are contextual and consider circumstance such as time, place and culture, the principles they are based upon are universal such as justice, equality and respect. Many Muslim scholars argue that even though technology may have advanced, the fundamentals of human life have not.\nSchools of jurisprudence.\nThere are several schools of fiqh thought ( '; pl. ')\nThe schools of Sunni Islam are each named by students of the classical jurist who taught them. The Sunni schools (and where they are commonly found) are\nThe schools of Shia Islam comprise:\nEntirely separate from both the Sunni and Shia traditions, Khawarij Islam has evolved its own distinct school.\nThese schools share many of their rulings, but differ on the particular hadiths they accept as authentic and the weight they give to analogy or reason (qiyas) in deciding difficulties.\nThe relationship between (at least the Sunni) schools of jurisprudence and the conflict between the unity of the Shariah and the diversity of the schools, was expressed by the 12th century Hanafi scholar Abu Hafs Umar al-Nasafi, who wrote: \"Our school is correct with the possibility of error, and another school is in error with the possibility of being correct.\"\nInfluence on Western laws.\nA number of important legal institutions were developed by Muslim jurists during the classical period of Islam, known as the Islamic Golden Age. One such institution was the \"Hawala\", an early informal value transfer system, which is mentioned in texts of Islamic jurisprudence as early as the 8th century. \"Hawala\" itself later influenced the development of the agency in common law and in civil laws such as the \"aval\" in French law and the \"avallo\" in Italian law.\nThe \"Waqf\" in Islamic law, which developed during the 7th\u20139th centuries, bears a notable resemblance to the trusts in the English trust law. For example, every \"Waqf\" was required to have a \"waqif\" (settlor), \"mutawillis\" (trustee), \"qadi\" (judge) and beneficiaries. The trust law developed in England at the time of the Crusades, during the 12th and 13th centuries, was introduced by Crusaders who may have been influenced by the \"Waqf\" institutions they came across in the Middle East.\nIn classical Islamic jurisprudence, litigants in court may obtain notarized statements from between three and twelve witnesses. When the statements of all witnesses are consistent, the notaries will certify their unanimous testimony in a legal document, which may be used to support the litigant's claim. The notaries serve to free the judge from the time-consuming task of hearing the testimony of each eyewitness himself, and their documents serve to legally authenticate each oral testimony. The Maliki school requires two notaries to collect a minimum of twelve eyewitness statements in certain legal cases, including those involving unregistered marriages and land disputes. John Makdisi has compared this group of twelve witness statements, known as a \"lafif\", to English Common Law jury trials under Henry II, surmising a link between the king's reforms and the legal system of the Kingdom of Sicily. The island had previously been ruled by various Islamic dynasties. \nSeveral other fundamental common law institutions may have been adapted from similar legal institutions in Islamic law and jurisprudence, and introduced to England by the Normans after the Norman conquest of England and the Emirate of Sicily, and by Crusaders during the Crusades. In particular, the \"royal English contract protected by the action of debt is identified with the Islamic \"Aqd\", the English assize of novel disseisin is identified with the Islamic \"Istihqaq\", and the English jury is identified with the Islamic \"lafif\".\" John Makdisi speculated that English legal institutions such as \"the scholastic method, the licence to teach\", the \"law schools known as Inns of Court in England and \"Madrasas\" in Islam\" and the \"European commenda\" (Islamic \"Qirad\") may have also originated from Islamic law. The methodology of legal precedent and reasoning by analogy (\"Qiyas\") are also similar in both the Islamic and common law systems. These influences have led some scholars to suggest that Islamic law may have laid the foundations for \"the common law as an integrated whole\"."}
{"id": "11115", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11115", "title": "Flank", "text": "Flank may refer to:"}
{"id": "11117", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11117", "title": "Fimbrium", "text": ""}
{"id": "11118", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11118", "title": "First Council of Nicaea", "text": "The First Council of Nicaea ( ; ) was a council of Christian bishops convened in the Bithynian city of Nicaea (now \u0130znik, Turkey) by the Roman Emperor Constantine I. The Council of Nicaea met from May until the end of July 325.\nThis ecumenical council was the first of many efforts to attain consensus in the church through an assembly representing all Christendom. Hosius of Corduba may have presided over its deliberations. Its main accomplishments were settlement of the Christological issue of the divine nature of God the Son and his relationship to God the Father, the construction of the first part of the Nicene Creed, mandating uniform observance of the date of Easter, and promulgation of early canon law. Primary sources are collected in \"Fontes Nicaenae Synodi\".\nBackground.\nAlexandrian controversies.\nThe major impetus for the calling of the Council of Nicaea arose in a theological dispute among the Christian clergy of Alexandria concerning the nature of Jesus, his origin, and relation to God the Father. Scholars propose dates between 318 and 322 for the beginning of the dispute. The precise origins of the controversy are unclear, but the principal actors were Archbishop Alexander of Alexandria and the presbyter Arius. Arius' teachings are known partially from a few pieces of his writing which survive, but principally from his opponents, primarily Alexander and Athanasius of Alexandria. Arius criticized Alexander's teachings on Christology; Alexander taught that Jesus as God the Son was eternally generated from the Father, while Arius and his followers asserted that the Father alone was eternal, and that the Son was created or begotten by the Father, and thus had a defined point of origin and was subordinate to the Father. Arius accused Alexander of following the teachings of Sabellius, who taught that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were one person, rather than the view held throughout the east that they were distinct. Alexander called a local council of bishops from Egypt and Libya, which sided with Alexander's view. Arius refused to subscribe to the council's decision, and he and several followers were excommunicated and exiled from Alexandria by Alexander. Arius then traveled to churches around the Roman east and wrote to bishops to gain support of his view. Among Arius' supporters were Eusebius of Nicomedia and Eusebius of Caesarea, and they advocated for his view and his restoration to the church in Alexandria. Alexander also circulated letters defending his own position.\nParallel to the theological controversy between Alexander and Arius was the Melitian schism in the Alexandrian church. Melitius, bishop of Lycopolis, had acted in the stead of the imprisoned bishop Peter I of Alexandria during the Diocletianic Persecution, but after Peter's death in 311 refused to give up his right to ordain clergy or recognize the authority of Peter's successors Achillas or Alexander.\nConstantine and the calling of the council.\nIn 324, the western Roman emperor Constantine defeated the eastern emperor Licinius and became the sole ruler of the Roman Empire. It was at this time that, likely from Eusebius of Nicomedia, he became aware of the controversy between Alexander and Arius. Constantine wrote a letter to the two, urging them to end their dispute and reconcile. This was not Constantine's first direct involvement in ecclesiastical controversy; he had previously attempted to resolve a schism over Donatism in North Africa, first appointing Miltiades, Bishop of Rome to hear the dispute (with the instruction \"I do not wish you to leave schism or division of any kind anywhere.\") and then calling the Council of Arles.\nConstantine's letter was carried to Alexandria by Bishop Hosius of Corduba as his representative. Hosius apparently then presided over a synod at Alexandria concerning the date of Easter, before calling a council of Eastern bishops in Antioch. This council endorsed Alexander's position and issuing a statement of faith that held that the Son was \"begotten not from non-existence, but from the Father, not as made, but as genuine product\" and contained anathemas against Arius. Eusebius of Caesaria was also temporarily excommunicated because of his contention that the Father and the Son were of two different natures.\nThe bishops were then to assemble in Ancyra in Asia Minor for a \"great and hierarchic council\", either at their own impetus or Constantine's command. Constantine moved the council to Nicaea in Bithynia, a venue that would allow him to attend personally (due to its proximity to his capital at Nicomedia) and would allow easier access for bishops from throughout the empire. The emperor had also planned a commemoration of the twentieth year of his reign in Nicaea.\nAttendance and logistics.\nThe expenses of the council, including the travel of the bishops, were paid by the imperial treasury. Contemporary reports of attendance range from 250 to 300, with the figure of 318 given by Athanasius of Antioch becoming traditionally accepted. 318 is also the number of members of Abraham's household given in the Book of Genesis. Lists of signatories to the final decisions of the council contain 200\u2013220 names. With presbyters and deacons attending each bishop, the total attendance may have been between 1200 and 1900. Most of the bishops were eastern, with about twenty from Egypt and Libya, another fifty from Palestine and Syria, and more than one hundred from Asia\nMinor. One bishop each from Persia and Scythia were present. The few western attendees were Hosius, Caecilianus of Carthage, Nicasius of Die, Marcus of Calabria, Domnus of Pannonia, and Victor and Vicentius, two presbyters representing Bishop Sylvester of Rome. Of the eastern bishops, the principal supporters of Arius were Eusebius of Nicomedia, Eusebius of Caesarea, Menophantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Narcissus of Neronias, Theonas of Marmarike, Secundus of Ptolemais, and Theognis of Nicaea. The principal anti-Arians included Alexander of Alexandria, Eustathius of Antioch, Marcellus of Ancyra and Macarius of Jerusalem.\nThe council was held in Nicea's imperial palace. The bishops most likely assembled in a rectangular basilica hall based on Eusebius of Caearea's description.\nProceedings.\nConstantine opened the council with a formal entrance after the bishops arrived, with Eusebius describing him as \"like some heavenly angel of God, his bright mantle shedding lustre like beams of light, shining with the fiery radiance of a purple robe, and decorated with the dazzling brilliance of gold and precious stones.\" He then gave an opening speech in Latin (rather than the Greek spoken by most of the attendees). Fifth-century church historian Socrates of Constantinople gives the date of the opening as 20 May 325, though it may have been later in June.\nIt is most likely that Hosius presided over the council's debates and proceedings as Constantine's representative. Constantine did join in the debates of the council (in Greek), but did not see himself as a voting member as he was not a bishop. No detailed \"acta\" of the council exist as they do for later councils, so the exact sequence of the council's debates is uncertain. Church councils at the time were modeled after the proceedings of the Roman Senate, with the presiding officer having a large degree of control, and participants speaking in turn based on hierarchy. Probably the first matter considered was the status of Eusebius of Caesarea and the other bishops excommunicated at Antioch, as this would determine whether they could participate in the rest of the council. According to Eusebius, his profession of faith was accepted and he was restored. An account by Eustathius of Antioch records a statement of faith by a Eusebius being rejected by the council, though this was likely Eusebius of Nicomedia.\nA statement of faith based on earlier creeds was drafted (possibly by a smaller committee), and each line was debated by the council. All but two bishops subscribed to the final form of the creed as adopted. In addition to the Arian question, the council also considered the calculation of Easter, and adopted the Roman and Alexandrian method over the objection of several eastern bishops. The bishops also agreed to a resolution on the Melitian schism and issued twenty canons. The council closed in the first weeks of July, with the bishops invited to attend Constantine's celebration of his twentieth anniversary on the throne on 25 July. Both the bishops and the emperor issued letters recounting the councils' decisions to be circulated throughout the empire.\nEcumenical Council.\nThe First Council of Nicaea was the first ecumenical council of the church. Nicaea \"was the first time that any attempt had been made to summon a general council of the whole church at which, at least in theory, the church in every part of the Roman Empire should be represented\".\nDerived from Greek (), \"ecumenical\" means \"worldwide\" but generally is assumed to be limited to the known inhabited Earth, and at this time in history is nearly synonymous with the Roman Empire. The earliest extant uses of the term for a council are Eusebius' \"Life of Constantine\" around 338, which states \"he convoked an ecumenical council\" (, ) and a letter in 382 to Pope Damasus I and the Latin bishops from the First Council of Constantinople.\nHistorically significant as the first effort to attain consensus in the church through an assembly representing all of Christendom, the council was the first occasion where the technical aspects of Christology were discussed. Through it a precedent was set for subsequent general councils to adopt creeds and canons. This council is generally considered the beginning of the period of the first seven ecumenical councils in the history of Christianity.\nOutcomes.\nNicene Creed.\nThe council formulated a creed, a declaration and summary of the Christian faith. Several creeds were already in existence; many creeds were acceptable to the members of the council, including Arius. From earliest times, various creeds served as a means of identification for Christians, as a means of inclusion and recognition, especially at baptism. In Rome, for example, the Apostles' Creed was popular, especially for use in Lent and the Easter season. In the Council of Nicaea, one specific creed was used to define the Church's faith clearly, to include those who professed it, and to exclude those who did not.\nThe original Nicene Creed read as follows:\nThe creed was amended by the First Council of Constantinople in 381.\nDistinctive elements.\nSome distinctive elements in the Nicene Creed, perhaps from the hand of Hosius of Cordova, were added, some specifically to counter the Arian point of view.\nAnathemas.\nAt the end of the creed came a list of anathemas, designed to repudiate explicitly the Arians' stated claims.\nThus, instead of a baptismal creed acceptable to both the Arians and their opponents, the Council promulgated one which was clearly opposed to Arianism and incompatible with the distinctive core of their beliefs. The text of this profession of faith is preserved in a letter of Eusebius to his congregation, in Athanasius' works, and elsewhere. The Homoousians (from the Koine Greek word translated as \"of same substance\" which was condemned at the Council of Antioch in 264\u2013268) were supported by Constantine and Hosius and were able to advance the use of the term, thus the creed was accepted by the council.\nExiled.\nThe emperor carried out his earlier statement: everybody who refused to endorse the creed would be exiled. Arius, Theonas, and Secundus refused to adhere to the creed and were thus exiled to Illyria, in addition to being excommunicated. The works of Arius were ordered to be confiscated and consigned to the flames, while his supporters were considered as \"enemies of Christianity\". Nevertheless, the controversy continued in various parts of the empire.\nSeparation of Easter computation from Jewish calendar.\nThe feast of Easter is linked to the Jewish Passover and Feast of Unleavened Bread, as Christians believe that the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus occurred at the time of those observances. As early as Pope Sixtus I in the 2nd century, some Christians had set Easter to a Sunday in the lunar month of Nisan. To determine which lunar month was to be designated as Nisan, Christians relied on the Jewish community. By the late 3rd century some Christians began to express dissatisfaction with what they took to be the disorderly state of the Jewish calendar. They argued that contemporary Jews were identifying the wrong lunar month as the month of Nisan, choosing a month whose 14th day fell before the spring equinox.\nChristians, these thinkers argued, should abandon the custom of relying on Jewish informants and instead do their own computations to determine which month should be styled Nisan, setting Easter within this independently computed, Christian Nisan, which would always locate the festival after the equinox. They justified this break with tradition by arguing that it was in fact the contemporary Jewish calendar that had broken with tradition by ignoring the equinox and that in former times the 14th of Nisan had never preceded the equinox. Others felt that the customary practice of reliance on the Jewish calendar should continue, even if the Jewish computations were in error from a Christian point of view.\nThe controversy between those who argued for independent computations and those who argued for continued reliance on the Jewish calendar was formally resolved by the council, which endorsed the independent procedure that had been in use for some time at Rome and Alexandria. Easter was henceforward to be a Sunday in a lunar month chosen according to Christian criteria\u2014in effect, a Christian Nisan\u2014not in the month of Nisan as defined by Jews. Those who argued for continued reliance on the Jewish calendar (called \"protopaschites\" by later historians) were urged to come around to the majority position. That they did not all immediately do so is revealed by the existence of sermons, canons, and tracts written against the protopaschite practice in the late 4th century.\nThese two rules\u2014independence of the Jewish calendar and worldwide uniformity\u2014were the only rules for Easter explicitly laid down by the council. No details for the computation were specified; these were worked out in practice, a process that took centuries and generated numerous controversies, some of which remain unresolved. In particular, the Council did not seem to decree that Easter must fall on Sunday. This was unnecessary as it resolved against the \"Quartodecimani\", who celebrated on any day of the week, in favour of the Churches who postponed the celebration to the following Sunday. See the extract from the \"Letter of the Council of Nicaea to the Egyptian Church\", cited above.\nNor did the Council decree that Easter must never coincide with Nisan 15 (the first Day of Unleavened Bread, now commonly called \"Passover\") in the Hebrew calendar. The Finnish Orthodox Church explains, \"According to the definition of the Council of Nicaea in 325, Pascha is celebrated on the first Sunday after the full moon following the vernal equinox, but always after the Jewish Passover. The date of the vernal equinox was then defined as March 21.\" L'Huillier notes the success of this strategy - Orthodox Easter has never preceded Passover.\nResolution of the Melitian schism.\nThe suppression of the Melitian schism, an early breakaway sect, was another important matter that came before the Council of Nicaea. Melitius, it was decided, should remain in his own city of Lycopolis in Egypt but without exercising authority or the power to ordain new clergy; he was forbidden to go into the environs of the town or to enter another diocese for the purpose of ordaining its subjects. Melitius retained his episcopal title, but the ecclesiastics ordained by him were to receive again the laying on of hands, the ordinations performed by Melitius being therefore regarded as invalid. Clergy ordained by Melitius were ordered to yield precedence to those ordained by Alexander, and they were not to do anything without the consent of Bishop Alexander.\nIn the event of the death of a non-Melitian bishop or ecclesiastic, the vacant see might be given to a Melitian, provided he was worthy and the popular election were ratified by Alexander. Melitius' episcopal rights and prerogatives were taken from him. These mild measures, however, were in vain; the Melitians joined the Arians and caused more dissension than ever, being among the worst enemies of Athanasius.\nPromulgation of canon law.\nThe Council promulgated twenty new church laws, called \"canons\" (though the exact number is subject to debate), that is, rules of discipline. The twenty as listed in the works of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers are as follows:\nEffects.\nIn the short-term, the Council did not completely solve the problems it was convened to discuss, and a period of conflict and upheaval continued for some time. Constantine was succeeded by two Arian emperors in the Eastern Empire: his son, Constantius II, and Valens. Valens could not resolve the outstanding ecclesiastical issues and unsuccessfully confronted St. Basil over the Nicene Creed.\nPagan powers within the empire sought to maintain and at times re-establish paganism into the seat of the emperor (see Arbogast and Julian the Apostate). Arians and Meletians soon regained nearly all of the rights they had lost, and consequently Arianism continued to spread and be a subject of debate within the Church during the remainder of the 4th century. Almost immediately, Eusebius of Nicomedia, an Arian bishop and cousin to Constantine I, used his influence at court to sway Constantine's favor from the proto-orthodox Nicene bishops to the Arians.\nEustathius of Antioch was deposed and exiled in 330. Athanasius, who had succeeded Alexander as Bishop of Alexandria, was deposed by the First Synod of Tyre in 335, and Marcellus of Ancyra followed him in 336. Arius returned to Constantinople to be readmitted into the Church but died shortly before he could be received. Constantine died the next year, after finally receiving baptism from Arian Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia, and \"with his passing the first round in the battle after the Council of Nicaea was ended\".\nRole of Constantine.\nChristianity had only recently been legalised in the empire, the Diocletianic Persecution having ended in 311 under Galerius. Although Galerius stopped the Persecution, Christianity was not legally protected until 313, when the emperors Constantine and Licinius agreed to what became known as the Edict of Milan, guaranteeing Christians legal protection and tolerance. However, Nicene Christianity did not become the state religion of the Roman Empire until the Edict of Thessalonica in 380. In the meantime, paganism remained legal and present in public affairs. Constantine's coinage and other official motifs, until the Council of Nicaea, had affiliated him with the pagan cult of Sol Invictus. At first, Constantine encouraged the construction of new temples and tolerated traditional sacrifices. Later in his reign, he gave orders for the pillaging and the tearing down of Roman temples.\nConstantine's role regarding Nicaea was that of supreme civil leader and authority in the empire. As Emperor, the responsibility for maintaining civil order was his, and he sought that the Church be of one mind and at peace. When first informed of the unrest in Alexandria due to the Arian disputes, he was \"greatly troubled\" and, \"rebuked\" both Arius and Bishop Alexander for originating the disturbance and allowing it to become public. Aware also of \"the diversity of opinion\" regarding the celebration of Easter and hoping to settle both issues, he sent the \"honored\" Bishop Hosius of Cordova (Hispania) to form a local church council and \"reconcile those who were divided\". When that embassy failed, he turned to summoning a synod at Nicaea, inviting \"the most eminent men of the churches in every country\".\nConstantine assisted in assembling the council by arranging that travel expenses to and from the bishops' episcopal sees, as well as lodging at Nicaea, be covered out of public funds. He also provided and furnished a \"great hall ... in the palace\" as a place for discussion so that his guests \"should be treated with becoming dignity\". In addressing the opening of the council, he \"exhorted the Bishops to unanimity and concord\" and called on them to follow the Holy Scriptures with: \"Let, then, all contentious disputation be discarded; and let us seek in the divinely-inspired word the solution of the questions at issue.\"\nThereupon, the debate about Arius and church doctrine began. \"The emperor gave patient attention to the speeches of both parties\" and \"deferred\" to the decision of the bishops. The bishops first pronounced Arius' teachings to be anathema, formulating the creed as a statement of correct doctrine. When Arius and two followers refused to agree, the bishops pronounced clerical judgement by excommunicating them from the Church. Respecting the clerical decision, and seeing the threat of continued unrest, Constantine also pronounced civil judgement, banishing them into exile. This was the beginning of the practice of using secular power to establish doctrinal orthodoxy within Christianity, an example followed by all later Christian emperors, which led to a circle of Christian violence, and of Christian resistance couched in terms of martyrdom.\nMisconceptions.\nBiblical canon.\nThere is no record of any discussion of the biblical canon at the council. The development of the biblical canon was nearly complete (with exceptions known as the Antilegomena, written texts whose authenticity or value is disputed) by the time the Muratorian fragment was written. The main source of the idea that the canon was created at the Council of Nicaea seems to be Voltaire, who popularised a story that the canon was determined by placing all the competing books on an altar during the council and then keeping the ones that did not fall off. The original source of this \"fictitious anecdote\" is the \"Synodicon Vetus\", a pseudo-historical account of early Church councils from 887.\nIn 331, Constantine commissioned fifty Bibles for the use of the Bishop of Constantinople, but little else is known (in fact, it is not even certain whether his request was for fifty copies of the entire Old and New Testaments, only the New Testament, or merely the Gospels). Some scholars believe that this request provided motivation for canon lists. In Jerome's \"Prologue to Judith\", he claims that the Book of Judith was \"found by the Nicene Council to have been counted among the number of the Sacred Scriptures\". However, modern scholars such as Edmon Gallagher have doubted that this indicates any canon selection in the council.\nTrinity.\nThe Council of Nicaea dealt primarily with the issue of the deity of Christ. The term \"Trinity\" was already in use, with the earliest existing reference being by Theophilus of Antioch (AD 115\u2013181), referring to Theos, the Logos, and Sophia (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as the Holy Spirit was referred to by several Church fathers), though many scholars believe that the way the term was used indicates that it was known previously to his readers. Also, over a century before, the term \"Trinity\" ( in Greek; in Latin) was used in the writings of Origen and Tertullian, and a general notion of a \"divine three\", in some sense, was expressed in the 2nd-century writings of Polycarp, Ignatius, and Justin Martyr. In Nicaea, questions regarding the Holy Spirit were left largely unaddressed until after the relationship between the Father and the Son was settled around the year 362. The doctrine in a more full-fledged form was not formulated until the Council of Constantinople in 381 and a final form formulated primarily by Gregory of Nyssa.\nConstantine.\nWhile Constantine had sought a unified church after the council, he did not force the homoousian view of Christ's nature on the council. Constantine did not commission any Bibles at the council. Despite Constantine's sympathetic interest in the Church, he was not baptized until some 11 or 12 years after the council, putting off baptism as long as he did so as to be absolved from as much sin as possible.\nDisputed matters.\nAccording to Protestant theologian Philip Schaff: \"The Nicene fathers passed this canon not as introducing anything new, but merely as confirming an existing relation on the basis of church tradition; and that, with special reference to Alexandria, on account of the troubles existing there. Rome was named only for illustration; and Antioch and all the other eparchies or provinces were secured their admitted rights. The bishoprics of Alexandria, Rome, and Antioch were placed substantially on equal footing.\" Thus, according to Schaff, the Bishop of Alexandria was to have jurisdiction over the provinces of Egypt, Libya and the Pentapolis, just as the Bishop of Rome had authority \"with reference to his own diocese.\"\nHowever, according to Fr. James F. Loughlin, there is an alternative Catholic interpretation. It involves five different arguments \"drawn respectively from the grammatical structure of the sentence, from the logical sequence of ideas, from Catholic analogy, from comparison with the process of formation of the Byzantine Patriarchate, and from the authority of the ancients\" in favor of an alternative understanding of the canon. According to this interpretation, the canon shows the role the Bishop of Rome had when he, by his authority, confirmed the jurisdiction of the other patriarchs\u2014an interpretation which is in line with the Catholic understanding of the Pope. Thus, the Bishop of Alexandria presided over Egypt, Libya and the Pentapolis, while the Bishop of Antioch \"enjoyed a similar authority throughout the great diocese of Oriens,\" and all by the authority of the Bishop of Rome. To Loughlin, that was the only possible reason to invoke the custom of a Roman Bishop in a matter related to the two metropolitan bishops in Alexandria and Antioch.\nHowever, Protestant and Catholic interpretations have historically assumed that some or all of the bishops identified in the canon were presiding over their own dioceses at the time of the Council\u2014the Bishop of Rome over the Diocese of Italy, as Schaff suggested, the Bishop of Antioch over the Diocese of Oriens, as Loughlin suggested, and the Bishop of Alexandria over the Diocese of Egypt, as suggested by Karl Josef von Hefele. According to Hefele, the council had assigned to Alexandria, \"the whole (civil) Diocese of Egypt.\" Yet those assumptions have since been proven false. At the time of the council, the Diocese of Egypt did exist but was known as the Diocese of Alexandria, so the council could have assigned it to Alexandria. Antioch and Alexandria were both located within the civil Diocese of Oriens, Antioch being the chief metropolis, but neither administered the whole. Likewise, Rome and Milan were both located within the civil Diocese of Italy, Milan being the chief metropolis.\nThis geographic issue related to Canon 6 was highlighted by Protestant writer Timothy F. Kauffman, as a correction to the anachronism created by the assumption that each bishop was already presiding over a whole diocese at the time of the council. According to Kauffman, since Milan and Rome were both located within the Diocese of Italy, and Antioch and Alexandria were both located within the Diocese of Oriens, a relevant and \"structural congruency\" between Rome and Alexandria was readily apparent to the gathered bishops: both had been made to share a diocese of which neither was the chief metropolis. Rome's jurisdiction within Italy had been defined in terms of several of the city's adjacent provinces since Diocletian's reordering of the empire in 293, as the earliest Latin version of the canon indicates.\nThat provincial arrangement of Roman and Milanese jurisdiction within Italy therefore was a relevant precedent, and provided an administrative solution to the problem facing the Council\u2014namely, how to define Alexandrian and Antiochian jurisdiction within the Diocese of Oriens. In canon 6, the Council left most of the diocese under Antioch's jurisdiction, and assigned a few provinces of the diocese to Alexandria, \"since the like is customary for the Bishop of Rome also.\"\nBibliography.\nPrimary sources.\nNote: NPNF2 = , see also Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers"}
{"id": "11119", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11119", "title": "February 5", "text": ""}
{"id": "11120", "revid": "15304268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11120", "title": "Fayez Ahmed", "text": ""}
{"id": "11121", "revid": "91715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11121", "title": "Fox News", "text": " \nThe Fox News Channel (FNC), commonly known as Fox News, is an American multinational conservative news and political commentary television channel and website based in New York City, U.S. It is owned by Fox News Media, which itself is owned by the Fox Corporation. It is the most-watched cable news network in the U.S., and as of 2023 it generates approximately 70% of its parent company's pre-tax profit. The channel broadcasts primarily from studios at 1211 Avenue of the Americas in Midtown Manhattan. Fox News provides a service to 86 countries and territories, with international broadcasts featuring Fox Extra segments during advertising breaks.\nThe channel was created by Australian-born American media mogul Rupert Murdoch in 1996 to appeal to a conservative audience, hiring former Republican media consultant and CNBC executive Roger Ailes as its founding CEO. It launched on October 7, 1996, to 17-million cable subscribers. Fox News grew during the late 1990s and 2000s to become the dominant United States cable news subscription network. By September 2018, 87-million U.S. households (91 percent of television subscribers) could receive Fox News. In 2019, it was the top-rated cable network, averaging 2.5-million viewers in prime time. Murdoch, the executive chairman since 2016, said in 2023 that he would step down and hand responsibilities to his son, Lachlan. Suzanne Scott has been the CEO since 2018.\nIt has been identified as engaging in biased and false reporting in favor of the Republican Party, its politicians, and conservative causes, while portraying the Democratic Party in a negative light. Researchers have argued that the channel is damaging to the integrity of news overall, and acts as an expanded part of the Republican Party.\nThe channel has knowingly endorsed false conspiracy theories to promote Republican and conservative causes. After Dominion Voting Systems initiated a defamation lawsuit against Fox regarding their reporting on the 2020 presidential election, Fox's internal communications were released. The communications showed that its presenters and senior executives privately doubted claims of a stolen election, while Fox continued to broadcast such claims. Other communications showed Fox CEO Suzanne Scott stating that fact-checking such claims would alienate Fox viewers. Fox settled the lawsuit in 2023 by agreeing to pay Dominion $787.5 million and acknowledging the court ruling that Fox had broadcast false statements about Dominion.\nAccording to research done by the Pew Research Center in 2019, 65 percent of Republicans and people who lean Republican trusted Fox News.\nHistory.\nIn May 1985, Australian publisher Rupert Murdoch announced that he and American industrialist and philanthropist Marvin Davis intended to develop \"a network of independent stations as a fourth marketing force\" to directly compete with CBS, NBC, and ABC through the purchase of six television stations owned by Metromedia. In July 1985, 20th Century Fox announced Murdoch had completed his purchase of 50% of Fox Filmed Entertainment, the parent company of 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.\nSubsequently, and prior to founding FNC, Murdoch had gained experience in the 24-hour news business when News Corporation's BSkyB subsidiary began Europe's first 24-hour news channel (Sky News) in the United Kingdom in 1989. With the success of his efforts establishing Fox as a TV network in the United States, experience gained from Sky News and the turnaround of 20th Century Fox, Murdoch announced on January 30, 1996, that News Corp. would launch a 24-hour news channel on cable and satellite systems in the United States as part of a News Corp. \"worldwide platform\" for Fox programming: \"The appetite for news\u00a0\u2013 particularly news that explains to people how it affects them\u00a0\u2013 is expanding enormously\".\nIn February 1996, after former U.S. Republican Party political strategist and NBC executive Roger Ailes left cable television channel America's Talking (now MSNBC), Murdoch asked him to start Fox News Channel. Ailes demanded five months of 14-hour workdays and several weeks of rehearsal shows before its launch on October 7, 1996.\nAt its debut 17-million households were able to watch FNC; however, it was absent from the largest U.S. media markets of New York City and Los Angeles. Rolling news coverage during the day consisted of 20-minute single-topic shows such as \"Fox on Crime\" or \"Fox on Politics\", surrounded by news headlines. Interviews featured facts at the bottom of the screen about the topic or the guest. The flagship newscast at the time was \"The Schneider Report\", with Mike Schneider's fast-paced delivery of the news. During the evening, Fox featured opinion shows: \"The O'Reilly Report\" (later \"The O'Reilly Factor\"), \"The Crier Report\" (hosted by Catherine Crier) and \"Hannity &amp; Colmes\". From the beginning, FNC has placed heavy emphasis on visual presentation. Graphics were designed to be colorful and gain attention; this helped the viewer to grasp the main points of what was being said, even if they could not hear the host (with on-screen text summarizing the position of the interviewer or speaker, and \"bullet points\" when a host was delivering commentary). Fox News also created the \"Fox News Alert\", which interrupted its regular programming when a breaking news story occurred.\nTo accelerate its adoption by cable providers, Fox News paid systems up to $11 per subscriber to distribute the channel. This contrasted with the normal practice, in which cable operators paid stations carriage fees for programming. When Time Warner bought Ted Turner's Turner Broadcasting System, a federal antitrust consent decree required Time Warner to carry a second all-news channel in addition to its own CNN on its cable systems. Time Warner selected MSNBC as the secondary news channel, not Fox News. Fox News claimed this violated an agreement (to carry Fox News). Citing its agreement to keep its U.S. headquarters and a large studio in New York City, News Corporation enlisted the help of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration to pressure Time Warner Cable (one of the city's two cable providers) to transmit Fox News on a city-owned channel. City officials threatened to take action affecting Time Warner's cable franchises in the city.\nDuring the September 11, 2001 attacks, Fox News was the first news organization to run a news ticker on the bottom of the screen to keep up with the flow of information that day. The ticker has remained, and has proven popular with viewers. In January 2002, Fox News surpassed CNN in ratings for the first time.\nIn 2023, \"The Economist\" reported that Murdoch had \"ditched a plan\" to remerge News Corporation with Fox because it \"faced resistance from News Corp investors unhappy at the prospect of being lumped together with Fox News, which they consider a toxic brand.\" Later that year, Murdoch said he would step down and that his son Lachlan would take over both Fox Corporation and News Corp.\nPolitical alignment.\nFox News has been identified as practicing biased and false reporting in favor of the Republican Party, its politicians, and conservative causes, while portraying the Democratic Party in a negative light. Fox News has been characterized by critics, commentators, and researchers as a propaganda organization and damaging to the integrity of news overall. Fox News has denied bias in its news reporting and the channel's official position is that its news reporting operates independently of its opinion journalism. The channel has knowingly endorsed false conspiracy theories to promote Republican and conservative causes.\nMedia analyst Brian Stelter, who has written extensively about the network, observed in 2021 that in more recent years it had adjusted its programming to present \"less news on the air and more opinions-about-the-news\" throughout the day, on concerns it was losing viewers to more conservative competitors that were presenting such content.\nOutlets.\nFNC maintains an archive of most of its programs. This archive also includes Movietone News series of newsreels from its now Disney-owned namesake movie studio, 20th Century Fox. Licensing for the Fox News archive is handled by ITN Source, the archiving division of ITN.\nTelevision.\nFNC presents a variety of programming, with up to 15 hours of live broadcasting per day in addition to programming and content for the Fox Broadcasting Company. Most programs are broadcast from Fox News headquarters in New York City (at 1211 Avenue of the Americas), in its streetside studio on Sixth Avenue in the west wing of Rockefeller Center, sharing its headquarters with sister channel Fox Business Network. Fox News Channel has eight studios at its New York City headquarters that are used for its and Fox Business' programming: Studio B (used for Fox Business programming), Studio D (which has an area for studio audiences; no longer in current use), Studio E (used for \"Gutfeld!\" and \"The Journal Editorial Report\"), Studio F (used for \"The Story with Martha MacCallum\", \"The Five\", Fox Democracy 2020, \"Fox &amp; Friends\", \"Outnumbered\", \"The Faulkner Focus\", and \"Fox News Primetime\"), Studio G (which houses Fox Business shows, \"The Fox Report\", \"Your World with Neil Cavuto\", and \"Cavuto Live\"), Studio H (Fox News Deck used for breaking news coverage, no longer in current use), Studio J (used for \"America's Newsroom\", \"Hannity\", \"Fox News Live\", \"Fox &amp; Friends First\", and \"Sunday Morning Futures\") Starting in , \"Thursday Night Football\" had its pregame show, \"Fox NFL Thursday\", originating from Studio F. Another Fox Sports program, \"First Things First\", also broadcasts from Studio E.\nOther such programs (such as \"Special Report with Bret Baier\", \"The Ingraham Angle\", \"Fox News @ Night\", \"Media Buzz\", and editions of \"Fox News Live\" not broadcast from the New York City studios) are broadcast from Fox News's Washington, D.C. studios, located on Capitol Hill across from Washington Union Station in a secured building shared by a number of other television networks, which includes NBC News and C-SPAN. \"The Next Revolution\" is broadcast from Fox News' Los Angeles bureau studio, which is also used for news updates coming from Los Angeles. \"Life, Liberty &amp; Levin\" is done from Levin's personal studio in Virginia. Audio simulcasts of the channel are aired on SiriusXM Satellite Radio.\nIn an October 11, 2009, in a \"New York Times\" article, Fox said its hard-news programming runs from \"9 AM to 4 PM and 6 to 8 PM on weekdays\". However, it makes no such claims for its other broadcasts, which primarily consist of editorial journalism and commentary.\nFox News Channel began broadcasting in the 720p resolution format on May 1, 2008. This format is available on all major cable and satellite providers.\nFox News Media produces \"Fox News Sunday\", which airs on Fox Broadcasting and re-airs on FNC. Fox News also produces occasional special event coverage that is broadcast on FBC.\nRadio.\nWith the growth of the FNC, the company introduced a radio division, Fox News Radio, in 2003. Syndicated throughout the United States, the division provides short newscasts and talk radio programs featuring personalities from the television and radio divisions. In 2006, the company also introduced Fox News Talk, a satellite radio station featuring programs syndicated by (and featuring) Fox News personalities.\nOnline.\nIntroduced in December 1995, the Fox News website features news articles and videos about national and international news. Content on the website is divided into politics, media, U.S., and business. Fox News' articles are based on the network's broadcasts, reports from Fox affiliates and articles produced by other news agencies, such as the Associated Press. Articles are usually accompanied by a video related to the article. Fox News Latino is the version aimed at a Hispanic audience, although presented almost entirely in English, with a Spanish section.\nAccording to NewsGuard, \"Much of FoxNews.com's content, particularly articles produced by beat reporters and broadcasts produced by network correspondents, is accurate and well-sourced ... However, FoxNews.com has regularly advanced false and misleading claims on topics including the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol, the Russo-Ukrainian War, COVID-19, and U.S. elections\".\nIn September 2008, FNC joined other channels in introducing a live streaming segment to its website: \"The Strategy Room\", designed to appeal to older viewers. It airs weekdays from 9 AM to 5 PM and takes the form of an informal discussion, with running commentary on the news. Regular discussion programs include \"Business Hour\", \"News With a View\" and \"God Talk\". In March 2009, \"The Fox Nation\" was launched as a website intended to encourage readers to post articles commenting on the news. Fox News Mobile is the portion of the FNC website dedicated to streaming news clips formatted for video-enabled mobile phones.\nFox Nation.\nIn 2018, FNC announced that it would launch a subscription video on demand service known as Fox Nation. It serves as a companion service to FNC, carrying original and acquired talk, documentary, and reality programming designed to appeal to Fox News viewers. Some of its original programs feature Fox News personalities and contributors.\"\"\nRatings and reception.\nIn 2003, Fox News saw a large ratings jump during the early stages of the U.S. invasion of Iraq. At the height of the conflict, according to some reports, Fox News had as much as a 300% increase in viewership (averaging 3.3\u00a0million viewers daily). In 2004, Fox News' ratings for its broadcast of the Republican National Convention exceeded those of the three major broadcast networks. During President George W. Bush's address, Fox News attracted 7.3\u00a0million viewers nationally; NBC, ABC, and CBS had a viewership of 5.9\u00a0million, 5.1\u00a0million, and 5.0\u00a0million respectively.\nBetween late 2005 and early 2006, Fox News saw a brief decline in ratings. One was in the second quarter of 2006, when it lost viewers for every prime-time program compared with the previous quarter. The audience for \"Special Report with Brit Hume\", for example, dropped 19%. Several weeks later, in the wake of the 2006 North Korean missile test and the 2006 Lebanon War, Fox saw a surge in viewership and remained the top-rated cable news channel. Fox produced eight of the top ten most-watched nightly cable news shows, with \"The O'Reilly Factor\" and \"Hannity &amp; Colmes\" finishing first and second respectively.\nFNC ranked No. 8 in viewership among all cable channels in 2006, and No. 7 in 2007. The channel ranked number one during the week of Barack Obama's election (November 3\u20139) in 2008, and reached the top spot again in January 2010 (during the week of the special Senate election in Massachusetts). Comparing Fox to its 24-hour-news-channel competitors, in May 2010, the channel drew an average daily prime-time audience of 1.8\u00a0million viewers (versus 747,000 for MSNBC and 595,000 for CNN).\nIn September 2009, the Pew Research Center published a report on the public view of national news organizations. In the report, 72 percent of polled Republican Fox viewers rated the channel as \"favorable\", while 43 percent of polled Democratic viewers and 55 percent of all polled viewers shared that opinion. However, Fox was given the highest \"unfavorable\" rating of all national outlets studied (25 percent of all polled viewers). The report went on to say that \"partisan differences in views of Fox News have increased substantially since 2007\".\nA Public Policy Polling poll concluded in 2013 that positive perceptions of FNC had declined from 2010. 41% of polled voters said they trust it, down from 49% in 2010, while 46% said they distrust it, up from 37% in 2010. It was also called the \"most trusted\" network by 34% of those polled, more than had said the same of any other network.\nOn the night of October 22, 2012, Fox set a record for its highest-rated telecast, with 11.5\u00a0million viewers for the third U.S. presidential debate. In prime time the week before, Fox averaged almost 3.7\u00a0million viewers with a total day average of 1.66\u00a0million viewers.\nIn prime time and total day ratings for the week of April 15 to 21, 2013, Fox News, propelled by its coverage of the Boston Marathon bombing, was the highest-ranked network on U.S. cable television, for the first time since August 2005, when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast of the United States. January 2014 marked Fox News's 145th consecutive month as the highest-rated cable news channel. During that month, Fox News beat CNN and MSNBC combined in overall viewers in both prime time hours and the total day. In the third quarter of 2014, the network was the most-watched cable channel during prime time hours. During the final week of the campaign for the United States elections, 2014, Fox News had the highest ratings of any cable channel, news or otherwise. On election night itself, Fox News' coverage had higher ratings than that of any of the other five cable or network news sources among viewers between 25 and 54 years of age. The network hosted the first prime-time GOP candidates' forum of the 2016 campaign on August 6. The debate reached a record-breaking 24 million viewers, by far the largest audience for any cable news event.\nA 2017 study by the Berkman Klein Center for Internet &amp; Society at Harvard University found that Fox News was the third most-shared source among supporters of Donald Trump on Twitter during the 2016 presidential election, behind \"The Hill\" and \"Breitbart News\".\nIn 2018, Fox News was rated by Nielsen as America's most watched cable network, averaging a record 2.4\u00a0million viewers in prime time and total day during the period of January 1 to December 30, 2018. In an October 2018 Simmons Research survey of the trust in 38 news organizations, Fox News was ranked roughly in the center, with 44.7% of surveyed Americans saying they trusted it.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic led to increased viewership for all cable news networks. For the first calendar quarter of 2020 (January 1 \u2013 March 31), Fox News had their highest-rated quarter in the network's history, with Nielsen showing a prime time average total audience of 3.387\u00a0million viewers. Sean Hannity's program, \"Hannity\", weeknights at 9\u00a0pm ET was the top-rated show in cable news for the quarter averaging 4.2\u00a0million viewers, a figure that not only beat out all of its cable news competition but also placed it ahead of network competition in the same time slot. Fox ended the quarter with the top five shows in prime time, with Fox's \"Tucker Carlson Tonight\" finishing the quarter in second overall with an average audience of 4.2\u00a0million viewers, followed by \"The Five\", \"The Ingraham Angle\", and \"Special Report with Bret Baier\". \"The Rachel Maddow Show\" was the highest non-Fox show on cable, coming in sixth place. Finishing the quarter in 22nd place was \"The Lead with Jake Tapper\", CNN's highest rated show. According to a Fox News article on the subject, \"Fox &amp; Friends\" averaged 1.8\u00a0million viewers, topping CNN's \"New Day\" and MSNBC's \"Morning Joe\" combined. The same Fox News article said that the Fox Business Network also had its highest-rated quarter in history and that Fox News finished March as the highest-rated network in cable for the 45th consecutive month.\nAccording to the \"Los Angeles Times\" on August 19, 2020: \"Fox News Channel had six of last week's 11 highest-rated prime-time programs to finish first in the network ratings race for the third time since June\" 2020.\nA Morning Consult survey the week after Election Day 2020 showed 30 percent of Republicans in the United States had an unfavorable opinion of Fox News, while 54 percent of Republicans viewed the network favorably, compared to 67 percent before the election. A McClatchy news story suggested criticism from Donald Trump as a major reason, as well as the network's early calling of Arizona for Joe Biden, and later joining other networks in declaring Biden the winner of the 2020 election.\nRatings were also down for Fox News. Although it remained ahead of other networks overall, its morning show fell out of first place for the first time since 2001. Trump recommended OANN, which was gaining viewers. Newsmax was also increasing in popularity.\nFollowing a decline in ratings post-2020 U.S. presidential election, in 2021, Fox News regained its lead in cable news ratings ahead of CNN and MSNBC.\nDemographics.\nAs indicated by a 2013 \"New York Times\" article, based on Nielsen statistics, Fox appears to have a mostly aged demographic. In March 2024, Fox was the most watched news network in total day and prime time viewers in primetime, with 2.135 million/1.306 million viewers respectively, compared to MSNBC with A25-54 demo, 1.307 million in primetime and 830,000 in day viewers, and CNN with 601,000 in primetime and 462,000 in day viewers. In the Adults age 25-54 category, Fox also leads with 246,000 in primetime and 158,000 in day viewers, followed by MSNBC with 133,000 viewers in primetime and 86,000 viewers in day, and CNN with 124,000 viewers in primetime and 85,000 in day viewers. According to the same Nielsen analysis, MSNBC is the second most watched news network.\nIn 2008, in the 25\u201354 age group, Fox News had an average of 557,000 viewers, but dropped to 379,000 in 2013 while increasing its overall audience from 1.89\u00a0million in 2010 to 2.02\u00a0million in 2013. The median age of a prime-time viewer was 68 . A 2019 Pew Research Center survey showed that among those who named Fox News as their main source for political news, 69% are aged 50 or older.\nAccording to a 2013 Gallup poll, 94% of Fox viewers \"either identify as or lean Republican\". The 2019 Pew survey showed that among people who named Fox News as their main source for political and election news, 93% identify as Republicans. Among the top eight political news sources named by at least 2% of American adults, the results show Fox News and MSNBC as the two news channels with the most partisan audiences.\nWikipedia consensus on reliability.\nIn 2010, the Wikipedia community had its first major discussion on Fox News' reliability. The community decided that Fox News was politically biased, but generally reliable.\nIn July 2020, the Wikipedia community announced that Fox News would no longer be considered \"generally reliable\" in its reporting of science and politics, and that it \"should be used with caution to verify contentious claims\" for those topics. The decision was made due to Fox News downplaying the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as allegations of Fox News spreading misinformation about climate change and reporting on the false concept of \"no-go zones\" for non-Muslims in British cities. The decision did not affect Fox News' reliability on other topics.\nIn 2022, the Wikipedia community announced that Fox News would now be considered \"marginally reliable\" in its reporting of science and politics, that Fox News cannot be used as a source for \"exceptional claims\", and that its reliability would be decided on an individual case-by-case basis for other scientific and political claims. The decision only applies to news articles on Fox News' website and does not apply to Fox News articles about topics that are not scientific or political.\nFox News is considered a generally unreliable source for its scientific and political coverage and its talk shows.\nSlogan.\nFox News Channel originally used the slogan \"Fair and Balanced\", which was coined by network co-founder Roger Ailes while the network was being established. \"The New York Times\" described the slogan as being a \"blunt signal that Fox News planned to counteract what Mr. Ailes and many others viewed as a liberal bias ingrained in television coverage by establishment news networks\". In a 2013 interview with Peter Robinson of the Hoover Institution, Rupert Murdoch defended the company's \"Fair and Balanced\" slogan, saying, \"In fact, you'll find just as many Democrats as Republicans on and so on\".\nIn August 2003, Fox News sued comedian Al Franken over his use of the slogan as a subtitle for his book, \"\", which is critical of Fox News Channel. The lawsuit was dropped three days later, after Judge Denny Chin refused its request for an injunction. In his decision, Chin ruled the case was \"wholly without merit, both factually and legally\". He went on to suggest that Fox News' trademark on the phrase \"fair and balanced\" could be invalid. In December 2003, FNC won a legal battle concerning the slogan, when AlterNet filed a cancellation petition with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to have FNC's trademark rescinded as inaccurate. AlterNet included Robert Greenwald's documentary film \"Outfoxed\" (2004) as supporting evidence in its case. After losing early motions, AlterNet withdrew its petition; the USPTO dismissed the case. In 2008, FNC used the slogan \"We Report, You Decide\", referring to \"You Decide 2008\" (FNC's original slogan for its coverage of election issues).\nIn August 2016, Fox News Channel began to quietly phase out the \"Fair and Balanced\" slogan in favor of \"Most Watched, Most Trusted\"; when these changes were reported in June 2017 by Gabriel Sherman (a writer who had written a biography on Ailes), a network executive said the change \"has nothing to do with programming or editorial decisions\". It was speculated by media outlets that Fox News Channel was wishing to distance itself from Ailes' tenure at the network. In March 2018, the network introduced a new ad campaign, \"Real News. Real Honest Opinion.\" The ad campaign is intended to promote the network's opinion-based programming and counter perceptions surrounding \"fake news\".\nIn mid-November 2020, following the election, Fox News began to use the slogan \"Standing Up For What's Right\" to promote its primetime lineup.\nContent.\nBenghazi attack and aftermath.\nFox News provided extensive coverage of the 2012 Benghazi attack, which host Sean Hannity described in December 2012 as \"the story that the mainstream media ignores\" and \"obviously, a cover-up. And we will get to the bottom of it.\" Programming analysis by media watchdog Media Matters, which has declared a \"War on Fox News\", found that during the twenty months following the Benghazi attacks, FNC ran 1,098 segments on the issue, including:\nOver nearly four years after the Benghazi attack, there were ten official investigations, including six by Republican-controlled House committees. None of the investigations found any evidence of scandal, cover-up or lying by Obama administration officials.\nUranium One.\nFrom 2015 into 2018, Fox News broadcast extensive coverage of an alleged scandal surrounding the sale of Uranium One to Russian interests, which host Sean Hannity characterized as \"one of the biggest scandals in American history\". According to Media Matters, the Fox News coverage extended throughout the programming day, with particular emphasis by Hannity. The network promoted an ultimately unfounded narrative asserting that, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton personally approved the Uranium One sale in exchange for $145\u00a0million in bribes paid to the Clinton Foundation. Donald Trump repeated these allegations as a candidate and as president. No evidence of wrongdoing by Clinton had been found after four years of allegations, an FBI investigation, and the 2017 appointment of a Federal attorney to evaluate the investigation. In November 2017, Fox News host Shepard Smith concisely debunked the alleged scandal, infuriating viewers who suggested he should work for CNN or MSNBC. Hannity later called Smith \"clueless\", while Smith stated: \"I get it, that some of our opinion programming is there strictly to be entertaining. I get that. I don't work there. I wouldn't work there.\"\nPro-Republican and pro-Trump bias.\nFox News has been described as conservative media, and as providing biased reporting in favor of conservative political positions, the Republican Party, and President Donald Trump. Political scientist Jonathan Bernstein described Fox News as an expanded part of the Republican Party. Political scientists Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins wrote that Fox News helped \"Republicans communicate with their base and spread their ideas, and they have been effective in mobilizing voters to participate in midterm elections (as in 2010 and 2014).\" Prior to 2000, Fox News lacked an ideological tilt, and had more Democrats watch the channel than Republicans. During the 2004 United States presidential election, Fox News was markedly more hostile in its coverage of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, and distinguished itself among cable news outlets for heavy coverage of the Swift Boat smear campaign against Kerry. During President Obama's first term in office, Fox News helped launch and amplify the Tea Party movement, a conservative movement within the Republican Party that organized protests against Obama and his policies. In the 2004 documentary \"Outfoxed\", four people identified as former employees said that Fox News made them \"slant the news in favor of conservatives\". Fox News said that the film misrepresented the employment of these employees.\nDuring the Republican primaries, Fox News was perceived as trying to prevent Trump from clinching the nomination. Under Trump's presidency, Fox News remade itself into his image, as hardly any criticism of Trump could be heard on Fox News' prime-time shows. In Fox News' news reporting, the network dedicated far more coverage to Hillary Clinton-related stories, which critics argued was intended to deflect attention from the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections. Trump provided significant access to Fox News during his presidency, giving 19 interviews to the channel while only 6 in total to other news channels by November 2017; \"The New York Times\" described Trump's Fox News interviews as \"softball interviews\" and some of the interviewers' interview styles as \"fawning\". In July 2018, \"The Economist\" has described the network's coverage of Trump's presidency as \"reliably fawning\". From 2015 to 2017, the Fox News prime-time lineup changed from being skeptical and questioning of Trump to a \"Trump safe space, with a dose of Bannonist populism once considered on the fringe\". The Fox News website has also become more extreme in its rhetoric since Trump's election; according to Columbia University's Tow Center for Digital Journalism, the Fox News website has \"gone a little \"Breitbart\"\" over time. At the start of 2018, Fox News mostly ignored high-profile scandals in the Trump administration which received ample coverage in other national media outlets, such as White House Staff Secretary Rob Porter's resignation amid domestic abuse allegations, the downgrading of Jared Kushner's security clearance, and the existence of a non-disclosure agreement between Trump and the porn star Stormy Daniels.\nIn March 2019, Jane Mayer reported in \"The New Yorker\" that Fox News.com reporter Diana Falzone had the story of the Stormy Daniels\u2013Donald Trump scandal before the 2016 election, but that Fox News executive Ken LaCorte told her: \"Good reporting, kiddo. But Rupert [Murdoch] wants Donald Trump to win. So just let it go.\" The story was killed; LaCorte denied making the statement to Falzone, but conceded: \"I was the person who made the call. I didn't run it upstairs to Roger Ailes or others. ... I didn't do it to protect Donald Trump.\" She added that \"[Falzone] had put up a story that just wasn't anywhere close to being something I was comfortable publishing.\" Nik Richie, who claimed to be one of the sources for the story, called LaCorte's account \"complete bullshit\", adding that \"Fox News was culpable. I voted for Trump, and I like Fox, but they did their own 'catch and kill' on the story to protect him.\"\nA 2008 study found Fox News gave disproportionate attention to polls suggesting low approval for President Bill Clinton. A 2009 study found Fox News was less likely to pick up stories that reflected well on Democrats, and more likely to pick up stories that reflected well on Republicans. A 2010 study comparing Fox News Channel's \"Special Report With Brit Hume\" and NBC's \"Nightly News\" coverage of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan during 2005 concluded \"Fox News was much more sympathetic to the administration than NBC\", suggesting \"if scholars continue to find evidence of a partisan or ideological bias at FNC ... they should consider Fox as alternative, rather than mainstream, media\".\nResearch finds that Fox News increases Republican vote shares and makes Republican politicians more partisan. A 2007 study, using the introduction of Fox News into local markets (1996\u20132000) as an instrumental variable, found that in the 2000 presidential election \"Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points in the towns that broadcast Fox News\", suggesting \"Fox News convinced 3 to 28 percent of its viewers to vote Republican, depending on the audience measure\". These results were confirmed by a 2015 study. A 2014 study, using the same instrumental variable, found congressional \"representatives become less supportive of President Clinton in districts where Fox News begins broadcasting than similar representatives in similar districts where Fox News was not broadcast.\" Another 2014 paper found Fox News viewing increased Republican vote shares among voters who identified as Republican or independent. A 2017 study, using channel positions as an instrumental variable, found \"Fox News increases Republican vote shares by 0.3 points among viewers induced into watching 2.5 additional minutes per week by variation in position.\" This study used a different methodology for a later period and found an ever bigger effect and impact, leading Matthew Yglesias to write in the \"Political Communication\" academic journal that they \"suggest that conventional wisdom may be greatly underestimating the significance of Fox as a factor in American politics.\"\nFox News publicly denies it is biased, with Murdoch and Ailes saying to have included Murdoch's statement that Fox has \"given room to both sides, whereas only one side had it before\". In June 2009, Fox News host Chris Wallace said: \"I think we are the counter-weight [to NBC News] ... they have a liberal agenda, and we tell the other side of the story.\" In 2004, Robert Greenwald's documentary film \"Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism\" argued Fox News had a conservative bias and featured clips from Fox News and internal memos from editorial vice president John Moody directing Fox News staff on how to report certain subjects.\nA leaked memo from Fox News vice president Bill Sammon to news staff at the height of the health care reform in the United States debate has been cited as an example of the pro-Republican Party bias of Fox News. His memo asked the staff to \"use the term 'government-run health insurance,' or, when brevity is a concern, 'government option,' whenever possible\". The memo was sent shortly after Republican pollster Frank Luntz advised Sean Hannity on his Fox show: \"If you call it a public option, the American people are split. If you call it the government option, the public is overwhelmingly against it.\"\nSurveys suggest Fox News is widely perceived to be ideological. A 2009 Pew survey found Fox News is viewed as the most ideological channel in America, with 47 percent of those surveyed said Fox News is \"mostly conservative\", 14 percent said \"mostly liberal\" and 24 percent said \"neither\". In comparison, MSNBC had 36 percent identify it as \"mostly liberal\", 11 percent as \"mostly conservative\" and 27 percent as \"neither\". CNN had 37 percent describe it as \"mostly liberal\", 11 percent as \"mostly conservative\" and 33 percent as \"neither\". A 2004 Pew Research Center survey found FNC was cited (unprompted) by 69 percent of national journalists as a conservative news organization. A Rasmussen poll found 31 percent of Americans felt Fox News had a conservative bias, and 15 percent that it had a liberal bias. It found 36 percent believed Fox News delivers news with neither a conservative or liberal bias, compared with 37 percent who said NPR delivers news with no conservative or liberal bias and 32 percent who said the same of CNN.\nDavid Carr, media critic for \"The New York Times\", praised the 2012 United States presidential election results coverage on Fox News for the network's response to Republican adviser and Fox News contributor Karl Rove challenging its call that Barack Obama would win Ohio and the election. Fox's prediction was correct. Carr wrote: \"Over many months, Fox lulled its conservative base with agitprop: that President Obama was a clear failure, that a majority of Americans saw [Mitt] Romney as a good alternative in hard times, and that polls showing otherwise were politically motivated and not to be believed. But on Tuesday night, the people in charge of Fox News were confronted with a stark choice after it became clear that Mr. Romney had fallen short: was Fox, first and foremost, a place for advocacy or a place for news? In this moment, at least, Fox chose news.\"\nA May 2017 study conducted by Harvard University's Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy examined coverage of Trump's first 100 days in office by several major mainstream media outlets including Fox. It found Trump received 80% negative coverage from the overall media, and received the least negative coverage on Fox \u2013 52% negative and 48% positive.\nOn March 14, 2017, Andrew Napolitano, a Fox News commentator, claimed on \"Fox &amp; Friends\" that British intelligence agency GCHQ had wiretapped Trump on behalf of Barack Obama during the 2016 United States presidential election. On March 16, 2017, White House spokesman Sean Spicer repeated the claim. When Trump was questioned about the claim at a news conference, he said \"All we did was quote a certain very talented legal mind who was the one responsible for saying that on television. I didn't make an opinion on it.\" On March 17, 2017, Shepard Smith, a Fox News anchor, admitted the network had no evidence that Trump was under surveillance. British officials said the White House was backing off the claim. Napolitano was later suspended by Fox News for making the claim.\nIn June 2018, Fox News executives instructed producers to head off inappropriate remarks made on the shows aired by the network by hosts and commentators. The instructions came after a number of Fox News hosts and guests made incendiary comments about the Trump administration's policy of separating migrant children from their parents. Fox News host Laura Ingraham had likened the child detention centers that the children were in to \"summer camps\". Guest Corey Lewandowski mocked the story of a 10-year-old child with Down syndrome being separated from her mother; the Fox News host did not address Lewandowski's statement. Guest Ann Coulter falsely claimed that the separated children were \"child actors\"; the Fox News host did not challenge her claim. In a segment on Trump's alleged use of racial dog whistles, one Fox News contributor told an African-American whom he was debating: \"You're out of your cotton-picking mind.\"\nAccording to the 2016 book \"Asymmetric Politics\" by political scientists Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins, \"Fox News tends to raise the profile of scandals and controversies involving Democrats that receive scant attention in other media, such as the relationship between Barack Obama and William Ayers ... Hillary Clinton's role in the fatal 2012 attacks on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya; the gun-running scandal known as 'Fast and Furious'; the business practices of federal loan guarantee recipient Solyndra; the past activism of Obama White House operative Van Jones; the 2004 attacks on John Kerry by the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth; the controversial sermons of Obama's Chicago pastor Jeremiah Wright; the filming of undercover videos of supposed wrongdoing by the liberal activist group ACORN; and the 'war on Christmas' supposedly waged every December by secular, multicultural liberals.\"\nIn October 2018, Fox News ran laudatory coverage of a meeting between Trump-supporting rapper Kanye West and President Trump in the Oval Office. Fox News had previously run negative coverage of rappers and their involvement with Democratic politicians and causes, such as when Fox News ran headlines describing conscious hip-hop artist Common as \"vile\" and a \"cop-killer rapper\", and when Fox News ran negative coverage of Kanye West before he became a Trump supporter.\nOn November 4, 2018, Trump's website, DonaldJTrump.com, announced in a press release that Fox News host Sean Hannity would make a \"special guest appearance\" with Trump at a midterm campaign rally the following night in Cape Girardeau, Missouri. The following morning, Hannity tweeted \"To be clear, I will not be on stage campaigning with the President.\" Hannity appeared at the president's lectern on stage at the rally, immediately mocking the \"fake news\" at the back of the auditorium, Fox News reporters among them. Several Fox News employees expressed outrage at Hannity's actions, with one stating that \"a new line was crossed\". Hannity later asserted that his action was not pre-planned, and Fox News stated it \"does not condone any talent participating in campaign events\". Fox News host Jeanine Pirro also appeared on stage with Trump at the rally. The Trump press release was later removed from Trump's website.\nFox News released a poll of registered voters, jointly conducted by two polling organizations, on June 16, 2019. The poll found some unfavorable results for Trump, including a record high 50% thought the Trump campaign had coordinated with the Russian government, and 50% thought he should be impeached \u2013 43% saying he should also be removed from office \u2013 while 48% said they did not favor impeachment. The next morning on \"Fox &amp; Friends First\", host Heather Childers twice misrepresented the poll results, stating \"a new Fox News poll shows most voters don't want impeachment\" and \"at least half of U.S. voters do not think President Trump should be impeached,\" while the on-screen display of the actual poll question was also incorrect. Later that morning on \"America's Newsroom\", the on-screen display showed the correct poll question and results, but highlighted the 48% of respondents who opposed impeachment rather than the 50% who supported it (the latter being broken-out into two figures). As host Bill Hemmer drew guest Byron York's attention to the 48% opposed figure, they did not discuss the 50% support figure, while the on-screen chyron read: \"Fox News Poll: 43% Support Trump's Impeachment and Removal, 48% Oppose.\" Later that day, Trump tweeted: \"@FoxNews Polls are always bad for me...Something weird going on at Fox.\"\nIn April 2017, it became known that former Obama administration national security advisor Susan Rice sought the unmasking of Trump associates who were unidentified in intelligence reports, notably Trump's incoming national security advisor Michael Flynn, during the presidential transition. In May 2020, acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell, a Trump loyalist, declassified a list of Obama administration officials who had also requested unmasking of Trump associates, which was subsequently publicly released by Republican senators. That month, attorney general Bill Barr appointed federal prosecutor John Bash to examine the unmaskings. Fox News primetime hosts declared the unmaskings a \"domestic spying operation\" for which the Obama administration was \"exposed\" in the \"biggest abuse of power\" in American history. The Bash inquiry closed months later with no findings of substantive wrongdoing.\nHowever, certain Fox personalities have not had as much of a favorable reception from Trump: news anchors Shepard Smith (who retired from Fox in 2019) and Chris Wallace have been criticized by Trump for allegedly being adversarial, alongside Fox analyst Andrew Napolitano, who said Trump's actions in the Trump\u2013Ukraine scandal were \"both criminal and impeachable behavior\". Trump was also critical of the network hiring former DNC chair Donna Brazile, in 2019. The relationship between Trump and Fox News, as well as other Rupert Murdoch-controlled outlets, soured following the 2020 United States presidential election, as Trump refused to concede that Joe Biden had been elected President-elect. This negative tonal shift led to increased viewership of Newsmax and One America News among Trump and his supporters due to their increased antipathy towards Fox; and as a result, Fox released promotional videos of their opinion hosts disputing the election results, promoting a Trump-affiliated conspiracy theory about voter fraud. By one measure, Newsmax saw a 497% spike in viewership, while Fox News saw a 38% decline.\nWriting for the Poynter Institute for Media Studies in February 2021, senior media writer Tom Jones argued that the primary distinction between Fox News and MSNBC is not right bias vs. left bias, but rather that much of the content on Fox News, especially during its primetime programs, \"is not based in truth\".\nThe \"Tampa Bay Times\" reported in August 2021 that it had reviewed four months of emails indicating Fox News producers had coordinated with aides of Florida governor Ron DeSantis to promote his political prospects by inviting him for frequent network appearances, exchanging talking points and, in one case, helping him to stage an exclusive news event.\nIn February 2024, Alan Rosenblatt of Johns Hopkins University said that Fox News \"is an entertainment company that has a news division, not a news company\", adding that it \"not only does not provide that distinction, it goes out of its way to make it difficult to see the difference. They make their opinion programs look like news programs, and they incorporate enough opinion content on their news programs to further that deception.\"\nIn early 2024, Fox News host Jesse Watters promoted a conspiracy theory involving Taylor Swift, Travis Kelce, and the American Democratic party in hopes of influencing voters ahead of the U.S. presidential primary season.\nFox News has published headlines accusing the English Wikipedia of having a left-wing and socialist bias.\nCoverage of Russia investigation.\nOn October 30, 2017, when special counsel Robert Mueller indicted Paul Manafort and Rick Gates, and revealed George Papadopoulos had pleaded guilty (all of whom were involved in the Trump 2016 campaign), this was the focus of most media's coverage, except Fox News'. Hosts and guests on Fox News called for Mueller to be fired. Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson focused their shows on unsubstantiated allegations that Clinton sold uranium to Russia in exchange for donations to the Clinton Foundation and on the Clinton campaign's role in funding the Steele dossier. Hannity asserted: \"The very thing they are accusing President Trump of doing, they did it themselves.\" During the segment, Hannity mistakenly referred to Clinton as President Clinton. Fox News dedicated extensive coverage to the uranium story, which Democrats said was an attempt to distract from Mueller's intensifying investigation. CNN described the coverage as \"a tour de force in deflection and dismissal\". On October 31, CNN reported Fox News employees were dissatisfied with their outlet's coverage of the Russia investigation, with employees calling it an \"embarrassment\", \"laughable\", and saying it \"does the viewer a huge disservice and further divides the country\" and that it is \"another blow to journalists at Fox who come in every day wanting to cover the news in a fair and objective way\".\nWhen the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election intensified in October 2017, the focus of Fox News coverage turned \"what they see as the scandal and wrongdoing of President Trump's political opponents. In reports like these, Bill and Hillary Clinton are prominent and recurring characters because they are considered the real conspirators working with the Russians to undermine American democracy.\" Paul Waldman of \"The Washington Post\" described the coverage as \"No puppet. You're the puppet\", saying it was a \"careful, coordinated, and comprehensive strategy\" to distract from Mueller's investigation. German Lopes of \"Vox\" said Fox News' coverage has reached \"levels of self-parody\" as it dedicated coverage to low-key stories, such as a controversial \"Newsweek\" op-ed and hamburger emojis, while other networks had wall-to-wall coverage of Mueller's indictments.\nA \"FiveThirtyEight\" analysis of Russia-related media coverage in cable news found most mentions of Russia on Fox News were spoken in close proximity to \"uranium\" and \"dossier\". On November 1, 2017, \"Vox\" analyzed the transcripts of Fox News, CNN and MSNBC, and found Fox News \"was unable to talk about the Mueller investigation without bringing up Hillary Clinton\", \"talked significantly less about George Papadopoulos\u2014the Trump campaign adviser whose plea deal with Mueller provides the most explicit evidence thus far that the campaign knew of the Russian government's efforts to help Trump\u2014than its competitors\", and \"repeatedly called Mueller's credibility into question\".\nIn December 2017, Fox News escalated its attacks on the Mueller investigation, with hosts and guest commentators suggesting the investigation amounted to a coup. Guest co-host Kevin Jackson referred to a right-wing conspiracy theory claiming Strzok's messages are evidence of a plot by FBI agents to assassinate Trump, a claim which the other Fox co-hosts quickly said is not supported by any credible evidence. Fox News host Jeanine Pirro called the Mueller investigation team a \"criminal cabal\" and said the team ought to be arrested. Other Fox News figures referred to the investigation as \"corrupt\", \"crooked\", and \"illegitimate\", and likened the FBI to the KGB, the Soviet-era spy organization that routinely tortured and summarily executed people. Political scientists and scholars of coups described the Fox News rhetoric as scary and dangerous. Experts on coups rejected that the Mueller investigation amounted to a coup; rather, the Fox News rhetoric was dangerous to democracy and mirrored the kind of rhetoric that occurs before purges. A number of observers argued the Fox News rhetoric was intended to discredit the Mueller investigation and sway President Donald Trump to fire Mueller.\nIn August 2018, Fox News was criticized for giving more prominent coverage of a murder committed by an undocumented immigrant than the convictions of Donald Trump's former campaign manager, Paul Manafort, and his long-term personal attorney, Michael Cohen. At the same time, most other national mainstream media gave wall-to-wall coverage of the convictions. Fox News hosts Dana Perrino and Jason Chaffetz argued that voters care far more about the murder than the convictions of the President's former top aides, and hosts Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity downplayed the convictions.\nFalse claims about other media.\nCNN's Jake Tapper.\nIn November 2017, following the 2017 New York City truck attack wherein a terrorist shouted \"Allahu Akbar\", Fox News distorted a statement by Jake Tapper to make it appear as if he had said \"Allahu Akbar\" can be used under the most \"beautiful circumstances\". Fox News omitted that Tapper had said the use of \"Allahu Akbar\" in the terrorist attack was not one of these beautiful circumstances. A headline on FoxNews.com was preceded by a tag reading \"OUTRAGEOUS\". The Fox News Twitter account distorted the statement even more, saying \"Jake Tapper Says 'Allahu Akbar' Is 'Beautiful' Right After NYC Terror Attack\" in a tweet that was later deleted. Tapper chastised Fox News for choosing to \"deliberately lie\" and said \"there was a time when one could tell the difference between Fox and the nutjobs at \"Infowars\". It's getting tougher and tougher. Lies are lies.\" In 2009, Tapper had come to the defense of Fox News while he was a White House correspondent for ABC News, after the Obama administration claimed that the network was not a legitimate news organization.\nFox News guest host Jason Chaffetz apologized to Tapper for misrepresenting his statement. After Fox News had deleted the tweet, Sean Hannity repeated the misrepresentation and called Tapper \"liberal fake news CNN's fake Jake Tapper\" and mocked his ratings.\n\"The New York Times\".\nIn July 2017, a report by \"Fox &amp; Friends\" falsely said \"The New York Times\" had disclosed intelligence in one of its stories and that this intelligence disclosure helped Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, to evade capture. The report cited an inaccurate assertion by Gen. Tony Thomas, the head of the United States Special Operations Command, that a major newspaper had disclosed the intelligence. Fox News said it was \"The New York Times\", repeatedly running the chyron \"NYT Foils U.S. Attempt To Take Out Al-Bahgdadi\". Pete Hegseth, one of the show's hosts, criticized the \"failing \"New York Times\"\". President Donald Trump tweeted about the \"Fox &amp; Friends\" report shortly after it first aired, saying \"The Failing \"New York Times\" foiled U.S. attempt to kill the single most wanted terrorist, Al-Baghdadi. Their sick agenda over National Security.\" Fox News later updated the story, but without apologizing to \"The New York Times\" or responding directly to the inaccuracies.\nIn a \"Washington Post\" column, Erik Wemple said Chris Wallace had covered \"The New York Times\" story himself on \"Fox News Sunday\", adding: \"Here's another case of the differing standards between Fox News's opinion operation\", which has given \"a state-run vibe on all matters related to Trump\", compared to Fox News's news operation, which has provided \"mostly sane coverage\".\nClimate change.\nFox News has often been described as a major platform for climate change denial. According to the fact-checking website Climate Feedback, Fox News is part of \"a network of unreliable outlets for climate news.\" A 2011 study by Lauren Feldman and Anthony Leiserowitz found Fox News \"takes a more dismissive tone toward climate change than CNN and MSNBC\". A 2008 study found Fox News emphasized the scientific uncertainty of climate change more than CNN, was less likely to say climate change was real, and more likely to interview climate change skeptics. Leaked emails showed that in 2009 Bill Sammon, the Fox News Washington managing editor, instructed Fox News journalists to dispute the scientific consensus on climate change and \"refrain from asserting that the planet has warmed (or cooled) in any given period without IMMEDIATELY pointing out that such theories are based upon data that critics have called into question.\"\nAccording to climate scientist Michael E. Mann, Fox News \"has constructed an alternative universe where the laws of physics no longer apply, where the greenhouse effect is a myth, and where climate change is a hoax, the product of a massive conspiracy among scientists, who somehow have gotten the polar bears, glaciers, sea levels, superstorms, and megadroughts to play along.\" According to James Lawrence Powell's 2011 study of the climate science denial movement, Fox News provides \"the deniers with a platform to say whatever they like without fear of contradiction.\" Fox News employs Steve Milloy, a prominent climate change denier with close financial and organizational ties to oil companies, as a contributor. In his columns about climate change for \"FoxNews.com\", Fox News has failed to disclose his substantial funding from oil companies.\nIn 2011, the hosts of \"Fox &amp; Friends\" described climate change as \"unproven science\", a \"disputed fact\", and criticized the Department of Education for working together with the children's network Nickelodeon to teach children about climate change. In 2001, Sean Hannity described the scientific consensus on climate change as \"phony science from the left\". In 2004, he falsely alleged that \"scientists still can't agree on whether the global warming is scientific fact or fiction\". In 2010, Hannity said the so-called \"Climategate\" \u2013 the leaking of e-mails by climate scientist that climate change skeptics claimed demonstrated scientific misconduct but which all subsequent enquiries have found no evidence of misconduct or wrongdoing \u2013 a \"scandal\" that \"exposed global warming as a myth cooked up by alarmists\". Hannity frequently invites contrarian fringe scientists and critics of climate change to his shows. In 2019, a widely shared Fox News news report falsely claimed that new climate science research showed that the Earth might be heading to a new Ice Age; the author of the study that Fox News cited said that Fox News \"utterly misrepresents our research\" and the study did not in any way suggest that Earth was heading to an Ice Age. Fox News later corrected the story.\nShepard Smith drew attention for being one of few voices formerly on Fox News to forcefully state that climate change is real, that human activities are a primary contributor to it and that there is a scientific consensus on the issue. His acceptance of the scientific consensus on climate change drew criticism from Fox News viewers and conservatives. Smith left Fox News in October 2019. In a 2021 interview with Christiane Amanpour on her eponymous show in CNN, he stated that his presence on Fox had become \"untenable\" due to the \"falsehoods\" and \"lies\" intentionally spread on the network's opinion shows.\nMurder of Seth Rich conspiracy.\nOn May 16, 2017, a day when other news organizations were extensively covering Donald Trump's revelation of classified information to Russia, Fox News ran a lead story about a private investigator's uncorroborated claims about the murder of Seth Rich, a DNC staffer. The private investigator said he had uncovered evidence that Rich was in contact with WikiLeaks and law enforcement were covering it up. The killing of Rich has given rise to conspiracy theories in right-wing circles that Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party had Seth Rich killed allegedly because he was the source of the DNC leaks. U.S. intelligence agencies determined Russia was the source of the leaks. In reporting the investigator's claims, the Fox News report reignited right-wing conspiracy theories about the killing.\nThe Fox News story fell apart within hours. Other news organizations quickly revealed the investigator was a Donald Trump supporter and had according to NBC News \"developed a reputation for making outlandish claims, such as\u00a0one appearance\u00a0on Fox News in 2007 in which he warned that underground networks of pink pistol-toting lesbian gangs were raping young women.\" The family of Seth Rich, the Washington D.C. police department, the Washington D.C. mayor's office, the FBI, and law enforcement sources familiar with the case rebuked the investigator's claims. Rich's relatives said: \"We are a family who is committed to facts, not fake evidence that surfaces every few months to fill the void and distract law enforcement and the general public from finding Seth's murderers.\" The spokesperson for the family criticized Fox News for its reporting, alleging the outlet was motivated by a desire to deflect attention from the Trump-Russia story: \"I think there's a very special place in hell for people that would use the memory of a murder victim in order to pursue a political agenda.\" The family has called for retractions and apologies from Fox News for the inaccurate reporting. Over the course of the day, Fox News altered the contents of the story and the headline, but did not issue corrections. When CNN contacted the private investigator later that day, the investigator said he had no evidence that Rich had contacted WikiLeaks. The investigator claimed he only learned about the possible existence of the evidence from a Fox News reporter. Fox News did not respond to inquiries by CNN, and the Washington Post. Fox News later on May 23, seven days after the story was published, retracted its original report, saying the original report did not meet its standards.\nNicole Hemmer, then assistant professor at the\u00a0Miller Center of Public Affairs, wrote that the promotion of the conspiracy theory demonstrated how Fox News was \"remaking itself in the image of fringe media in the age of Trump, blurring the lines between real and fake news.\" Max Boot of the Council on Foreign Relations said while intent behind Fox News, as a counterweight to the liberal media was laudable, the culmination of those efforts have been to create an alternative news source that promotes hoaxes and myths, of which the promotion of the Seth Rich conspiracy is an example. Fox News was also criticized by conservative outlets, such as \"The Weekly Standard\", \"National Review\", and conservative columnists, such as Jennifer Rubin, Michael Gerson, and John Podhoretz.\nRich's parents, Joel and Mary Rich, sued Fox News for the emotional distress it had caused them by its false reporting. In 2020, Fox News settled with Rich family, making a payment that was not officially disclosed but which was reported to be in the seven figures. Although the settlement had been agreed to earlier in the year, Fox News arranged to delay the public announcement until after the 2020 presidential election.\nUnite the Right rally in Charlottesville.\nFox News hosts and contributors defended Trump's remarks that \"many sides\" were to blame for violence at a gathering of hundreds of white nationalists in Charlottesville, Virginia. Some criticized Trump. In a press conference on August 15, Trump used the term \"alt-left\" to describe counterprotesters at the white supremacist rally, a term which had been used in Fox News' coverage of the white supremacist rally. Several of Trump's comments at the press conference mirrored those appearing earlier on Fox News.\nAccording to Dylan Byers of CNN, Fox News' coverage on the day of the press conference \"was heavy with \"whataboutism\". The average Fox viewer was likely left with the impression that the media's criticism of Trump and leftist protestors' toppling of some Confederate statues were far greater threats to America than white supremacism or the president's apparent defense of bigotry.\" Byers wrote \"it showed that if Fox News has a line when it comes to Trump's presidency, it was not crossed on Tuesday.\"\nGlenn Beck's comments about George Soros.\nDuring Glenn Beck's tenure at Fox News, he became one of the most high-profile proponents of conspiracy theories about George Soros, a Jewish Hungarian-American businessman and philanthropist known for his donations to American liberal political causes. Beck regularly described Soros as a \"puppet-master\" and used common anti-Semitic tropes to describe Soros and his activities. In a 2010 three-part series, Beck depicted George Soros as a cartoonish villain trying to \"form a shadow government, using humanitarian aid as a cover\", and that Soros wanted a one-world government. Beck promoted the false and anti-Semitic conspiracy theory that Soros was a Nazi collaborator as a 14-year-old in Nazi-occupied Hungary. Beck also characterized Soros's mother as a \"wildly anti-Semitic\" Nazi collaborator. According to \"The Washington Post\": \"Beck's series was largely considered obscene and delusional, if not outright anti-Semitic\", but Beck's conspiracy theory became common on the right-wing of American politics. Amid criticism of Beck's false smears, Fox News defended Beck, stating \"information regarding Mr. Soros's experiences growing up were taken directly from his writings and from interviews given by him to the media, and no negative opinion was offered as to his actions as a child.\" Roger Ailes, then-head of Fox News, dismissed criticism levied at Beck by hundreds of rabbis, saying that they were \"left-wing rabbis who basically don't think that anybody can ever use the word, Holocaust, on the air.\"\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nDuring the first few weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, Fox News was considerably more likely than other mainstream news outlets to promote misinformation about COVID-19. The network promoted the narrative that the emergency response to the pandemic was politically motivated or otherwise unwarranted, with Sean Hannity explicitly calling it a \"hoax\" (he later denied doing so) and other hosts downplaying it. This coverage was consistent with the messaging of Trump at the time. Only in mid March did the network change the tone of its coverage, after President Trump declared a national emergency. At the same time that Fox News commentators downplayed the threat of the virus in public, Fox's management and the Murdoch family took a broad range of internal measures to protect themselves and their employees against it.\nSean Hannity and Laura Ingraham, two of Fox News's primetime hosts, promoted use of the drug hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19, an off-label usage which at the time was supported only by anecdotal evidence, after it was touted by Trump as a possible cure. Fox News promoted a conspiracy theory that coronavirus death toll numbers were inflated with people who would have died anyway from preexisting conditions. This was disputed by White House coronavirus task force members Anthony Fauci and Deborah Birx, with Fauci describing conspiracy theories as \"nothing but distractions\" during public health crises. Later in the pandemic, Hannity, Ingraham and Carlson promoted the use of livestock dewormer ivermectin as a possible COVID-19 treatment.\nStudies have linked trust in Fox News, as well as viewership of Fox News, with fewer preventive behaviors and more risky behaviors related to COVID-19.\nOnce a COVID-19 vaccine became widely available, Fox News consistently questioned the efficacy and safety of the vaccine, celebrated evidence-free skepticism, and blasted attempts to promote vaccinations. More than 90% of Fox Corporation's full-time employees had been fully vaccinated by September 2021.\n2020 election fraud allegations and lawsuits by Dominion and Smartmatic.\nAfter Trump's defeat in the 2020 presidential election, Fox News host Jeanine Pirro promoted baseless allegations on her program that voting machine company Smartmatic and its competitor Dominion Voting Systems had conspired to rig the election against Trump. Hosts Lou Dobbs and Maria Bartiromo also promoted the allegations on their programs on sister network Fox Business. In December 2020, Smartmatic sent a letter to Fox News demanding retractions and threatening legal action, specifying that retractions \"must be published on multiple occasions\" so as to \"match the attention and audience targeted with the original defamatory publications.\" Days later, each of the three programs aired the same three-minute video segment consisting of an interview with an election technology expert who refuted the allegations promoted by the hosts, responding to questions from an unseen and unidentified man. None of the three hosts personally issued retractions. Smartmatic filed a $2.7 billion defamation suit against the network, the three hosts, Powell and Trump attorney Rudy Giuliani in February 2021. In an April 2021 court brief seeking dismissal of the suit, Fox attorney Paul Clement argued that the network was simply \"reporting allegations made by a sitting President and his lawyers.\" A New York State Supreme Court judge ruled in March 2022 that the suit could proceed, though he dismissed allegations against Sidney Powell and Pirro, and some claims against Giuliani. The judge allowed allegations against Bartiromo and Dobbs to stand. The New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division unanimously rejected a Fox News bid to dismiss the Smartmatic suit in February 2023. The court reinstated defamation allegations against Giuliani and Pirro.\nIn December 2020, Dominion Voting Systems sent a similar letter demanding retractions to Trump attorney Sidney Powell, who had promoted the allegations on Fox programs. On March 26, 2021, Dominion filed a $1.6billion defamation lawsuit against Fox News, alleging that Fox and some of its pundits spread conspiracy theories about Dominion, and allowed guests to make false statements about the company. On May 18, 2021, Fox News filed a motion to dismiss the Dominion Voting Systems lawsuit, asserting a First Amendment right \"to inform the public about newsworthy allegations of paramount public concern.\" The motion to dismiss was denied on December 16, 2021, by a Delaware Superior Court judge. In addition to Bartiromo, Dobbs, and Pirro, the suit also names primetime hosts Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity. Venezuelan businessman Majed Khalil sued Fox, Dobbs and Powell for $250 million in December 2021, alleging they had falsely implicated him in rigging Dominion and Smartmatic machines. Dobbs and Fox News reached a confidential settlement with Khalil in April 2023.\nFox News was the only major network or cable news outlet to not carry the first televised prime time hearing of the January 6 committee live; its regular programming of \"Tucker Carlson Tonight\" and \"Hannity\" was aired without commercial breaks. During the weeks following the election, Carlson and Hannity often amplified Trump's election falsehoods on their programs; previously disclosed text messages between Hannity and White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany were presented during the hearing. Hannity told his audience, \"Unlike this committee and their cheerleaders in the media mob, we will actually be telling you the truth,\" while Carlson said, \"This is the only hour on an American news channel that won't be covering their propaganda live. They are lying and we are not going to help them do it.\"\nIn June 2022, a Delaware Superior Court judge again declined to dismiss the Dominion suit against Fox News, and also allowed Dominion to sue the network's corporate parent, Fox Corporation. The judge ruled that Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch may have acted with actual malice because there was a reasonable inference they \"either knew Dominion had not manipulated the election or at least recklessly disregarded the truth when they allegedly caused Fox News to propagate its claims about Dominion.\" He noted a report that Rupert Murdoch spoke with Trump a few days after the election and informed him that he had lost.\n\"The New York Times\" reported in December 2022 that Dominion had acquired communications between Fox News executives and hosts, and between a Fox Corporation employee and the Trump White House, showing they knew that what the network was reporting was untrue. Dominion attorneys said hosts Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson, and Fox executives, attested to this in sworn depositions. In November 2020, Hannity hosted Sidney Powell, who asserted Dominion machines had been rigged, but said in his deposition, \"I did not believe it for one second.\" A February 2023 Dominion court filing showed Fox News primetime hosts messaging each other to insult and mock Trump advisers, indicating the hosts knew the allegations made by Powell and Giuliani were false. Rupert Murdoch messaged that Trump's voter fraud claims were \"really crazy stuff,\" telling Fox News CEO Suzanne Scott that it was \"terrible stuff damaging everybody, I fear.\" As a January 2021 Georgia runoff election approached that would determine party control of the U.S. Senate, Murdoch told Scott, \"Trump will concede eventually and we should concentrate on Georgia, helping any way we can.\"\nAfter the 2016 election, the network developed a cutting-edge system to call elections, which proved very successful during the 2018 midterm elections. The network was the first to call the 2020 Arizona race for Biden, angering many viewers. Washington managing editor Bill Sammon supervised the network's Decision Desk that made the call. Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum, the network's main news anchors, suggested during a high-level conference call that relying solely on data to make the call was inadequate and that viewer reaction should also be considered; MacCallum said, \"in a Trump environment, the game is just very, very different.\" Sammon stood by the 2020 call and was fired by the network after the January 2021 Georgia runoff.\nIn 2023, Rupert Murdoch was deposed and testified that some Fox News commentators were endorsing election fraud claims they knew were false.&lt;ref name=\"Matza_2/27/2023\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Peters_Robertson_2/27/2023\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn February 2023, Fox's internal communications were released, showing that its presenters and senior executives privately doubted Donald Trump's claims of a stolen election. Chairman Rupert Murdoch once described Trump's voter fraud claims as \"really crazy stuff\", and also said that Trump advisers Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell's television appearances were \"terrible stuff damaging everybody\". One November 2020 exchange showed Tucker Carlson accusing Powell of \"lying ... I caught her. It's insane\", with Laura Ingraham responding that \"Sidney is a complete nut. No one will work with her. Ditto with Rudy\". In another exchange that month, Carlson called for Fox journalist Jacqui Heinrich to be \"fired\" because she fact-checked Trump and said that there was no evidence of voter fraud from Dominion. Carlson said that Heinrich's actions \"needs to stop immediately, like tonight. It's measurably hurting the company. The stock price is down\", while Heinrich deleted the fact-check the next morning.\nIn March 2023, more of Fox's internal communications were released. One November 2020 communication showed Fox CEO Suzanne Scott criticizing fact-checking, stating that she cannot \"keep defending these reporters who don't understand our viewers and how to handle stories ... The audience feels like we crapped on\" them, and Fox was losing their audience's \"trust and belief\" in them. Another December 2020 communication showed Scott responding to Fox presenter Eric Shawn's fact-checking of Donald Trump's false 2020 election claims by demanding that the fact-checking \"has to stop now ... This is bad business ... The audience is furious.\"\nOn March 31, 2023, Delaware Superior Court judge Eric Davis ruled in a summary judgment that it \"is CRYSTAL clear that none of the statements relating to Dominion about the 2020 election are true\" and ordered for the case to go to trial.\nOn April 18, 2023, Fox News reached a settlement with Dominion just before the trial started, concluding the lawsuit; Fox agreed to pay Dominion $787.5 million, and further stated: \"We acknowledge the Court's rulings finding certain claims about Dominion to be false\".\nCompulsory reductions in meat consumption.\nIn April 2021, at least five Fox News and Fox Business personalities amplified a story published by the \"Daily Mail\", a British tabloid, that incorrectly linked a university study to President Joe Biden's climate change agenda, to falsely assert that Americans would be compelled to dramatically reduce their meat consumption to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions caused by flatulence. Fox News aired a graphic detailing the supposed compulsory reductions, falsely indicating the information came from the Agriculture Department, which numerous Republican politicians and commentators tweeted. Fox News anchor John Roberts reported to \"say goodbye to your burgers if you want to sign up to the Biden climate agenda.\" Days later, Roberts acknowledged on air that the story was false.\nReport that Biden administration was continuing to build the Mexico\u2013United States border wall.\nAccording to analysis by Media Matters, on May 12, 2021, Fox News reported on its website: \"Biden resumes border wall construction after promising to halt it\". Correspondent Bill Melugin then appeared on \"Special Report with Bret Baier\" to report \"the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is actually going to be restarting border wall construction down in the Rio Grande Valley\" after \"a lot of blowback and pressure from local residents and local politicians.\" After the Corps of Engineers tweeted a clarification, Melugin deleted a tweet about the story and tweeted an \"update\" clarifying that a levee wall was being constructed to mitigate damage to flood control systems caused by uncompleted wall construction, and the website story headline was changed to \"Biden administration to resume border wall levee construction as crisis worsens.\" Later on \"Fox News Primetime\", host Brian Kilmeade briefly noted the levee but commented to former Trump advisor Stephen Miller: \"They're going to restart building the wall again, Stephen.\" Fox News host Sean Hannity later broadcast the original Melugin story without any mention of the levee.\nCrime reporting.\nMedia Matters reported in September 2024 that during the Biden presidency Fox News had promoted a false \"crime crisis\" narrative, particularly directed toward undocumented migrants, which reflected Donald Trump's political rhetoric. The Fox News narrative consisted of reported violent crime anecdotes rather than FBI crime rate statistics showing violent crime had declined significantly since 2020. One Fox host, Ainsley Earhardt, said that even if the FBI data were right, \"we're all a little bit more scared than we used to be.\" Later that month, weeks before the 2024 presidential election, the FBI released crime data for 2023 showing that violent crime had declined 3% from 2022. The report was widely covered by mainstream news outlets that day, though the Fox News coverage was limited to a 28-second segment by evening anchor Bret Baier. He reported \"critics say the report is not accurate because it does not include big cities,\" echoing a false assertion made by Elon Musk and other Trump supporters on social media.\nControversies.\nSexual harassment.\nThe network has been accused of permitting sexual harassment and racial discrimination by on-air hosts, executives, and employees, paying out millions of dollars in legal settlements. Prominent Fox News figures such as Roger Ailes, Bill O'Reilly and Eric Bolling were fired after many women accused them of sexual harassment. At least four lawsuits alleged Fox News co-president Bill Shine ignored, enabled or concealed Roger Ailes' alleged sexual harassment. Fox News CEO Rupert Murdoch has dismissed the high-profile sexual misconduct allegations as \"largely political\" and speculated they were made \"because we are conservative\".\nBill O'Reilly and Fox News settled six agreements, totaling $45\u00a0million, with women who accused O'Reilly of sexual harassment. In January 2017, shortly after Bill O'Reilly settled a sexual harassment lawsuit for $32\u00a0million (\"an extraordinarily large amount for such cases\"), Fox News renewed Bill O'Reilly's contract. Fox News's parent company, 21st Century Fox, said it was aware of the lawsuit. The contract between O'Reilly and Fox News read he could not be fired from the network unless sexual harassment allegations were proven in court.\nFox News's extensive coverage of the Harvey Weinstein scandal in October 2017 was seen by some as hypocritical. Fox News dedicated at least 12 hours of coverage to the Weinstein scandal, yet only dedicated 20 minutes to Bill O'Reilly, who just like Weinstein had been accused of sexual harassment by a multitude of women. A few weeks later, when a number of females under the age of 18, including a 14-year-old, accused Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore of making sexual advances, Hannity dismissed the sexual misconduct allegations and dedicated coverage on his TV show to casting doubt on the accusers. Other prime-time Fox News hosts Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham queried \"The Washington Post\"s reporting or opted to bring up sexual misconduct allegations regarding show business figures such as Harvey Weinstein and Louis C.K. Fox News figures Jeanine Pirro and Gregg Jarrett questioned both the validity of \"The Washington Post\"s reporting and that of the women. In December 2017, a few days before the Alabama Senate election, Fox News, along with the conspiracy websites \"Breitbart News\" and \"The Gateway Pundit\", ran an inaccurate headline which claimed one of Roy Moore's accusers admitted to forging an inscription by Roy Moore in her yearbook; Fox News later added a correction to the story.\nA number of Fox News hosts have welcomed Bill O'Reilly to their shows and paid tributes to Roger Ailes after his death. In May 2017, Hannity called Ailes \"a second father\" and said to Ailes's \"enemies\" that he was \"preparing to kick your a** in the next life\". Ailes had the year before been fired from Fox News after women alleged he sexually harassed them. In September 2017, several months after Bill O'Reilly was fired from Fox News in the wake of women alleging he sexually harassed them, Hannity hosted O'Reilly on his show. Some Fox News employees criticized the decision. According to CNN, during the interview, Hannity found kinship with O'Reilly as he appeared \"to feel that he and O'Reilly have both become victims of liberals looking to silence them.\"\nObama administration conflict.\nIn September 2009, the Obama administration engaged in a verbal conflict with Fox News Channel. On September 20, President Barack Obama appeared on all major news programs except Fox News, a snub partially in response to remarks about him by commentators Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity and Fox coverage of Obama's health-care proposal.\nIn late September 2009, Obama's senior advisor David Axelrod and Roger Ailes met in secret to attempt to smooth out tensions between the two camps. Two weeks later, White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel referred to FNC as \"not a news network\" and communications director Anita Dunn said \"Fox News often operates as either the research arm or the communications arm of the Republican Party\". Obama commented: \"If media is operating basically as a talk radio format, then that's one thing, and if it's operating as a news outlet, then that's another.\" Emanuel said it was important \"to not have the CNNs and the others in the world basically be led in following Fox\".\nWithin days, it was reported that Fox had been excluded from an interview with administration official Ken Feinberg, with bureau chiefs from the White House press pool (ABC, CBS, NBC, and CNN) coming to Fox's defense. A bureau chief said: \"If any member had been excluded it would have been the same thing, it has nothing to do with Fox or the White House or the substance of the issues.\" Shortly after the story broke, the White House admitted to a low-level mistake, saying Fox had not made a specific request to interview Feinberg. Fox White House correspondent Major Garrett said he had not made a specific request, but had a \"standing request from me as senior White House correspondent on Fox to interview any newsmaker at the Treasury at any given time news is being made\".\nOn November 8, 2009, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported an unnamed Democratic consultant was warned by the White House not to appear on Fox News again. According to the article, Dunn claimed in an e-mail to have checked with colleagues who \"deal with TV issues\" who denied telling anyone to avoid Fox. Patrick Caddell, a Fox News contributor and former pollster for President Jimmy Carter, said he had spoken with other Democratic consultants who had received similar warnings from the White House.\nOn October 2, 2013, Fox News host Anna Kooiman cited on the air a fake story from the \"National Report\" parody site, which claimed Obama had offered to keep the International Museum of Muslim Cultures open with cash from his own pocket.\nJournalistic ethical standards.\nFox News attracted controversy in April 2018 when it was revealed primetime host Sean Hannity had defended Trump's then personal attorney Michael Cohen on air without disclosing Cohen was his lawyer. On April 9, 2018, federal agents from the U.S. Attorney's office served a search warrant on Cohen's office and residence. On the air, Hannity defended Cohen and criticized the federal action, calling it \"highly questionable\" and \"an unprecedented abuse of power\". On April 16, 2018, in a court hearing, Cohen's lawyers told the judge that Cohen had ten clients in 2017\u20132018 but did \"traditional legal tasks\" for only three: Trump, Elliott Broidy, and a \"prominent person\" who did not wish to be named for fear of being \"embarrassed\". The federal judge ordered the revelation of the third client, whom Cohen's lawyers named as Hannity.\nHannity was not sanctioned by Fox News for this breach of journalistic ethics, with Fox News releasing a statement that the channel was unaware of Hannity's relationship to Cohen and that it had \"spoken to Sean and he continues to have our full support.\" Media ethics experts said that Hannity's disclosure failure was a major breach of journalistic ethics and that the network should have suspended or fired him for it.\nNYC Human Rights Law violations.\nIn mid-2021, Fox News agreed to pay a $1 million settlement to New York City after its Commission on Human Rights cited \"a pattern of violating the NYC Human Rights Law\". A Fox News spokesperson claimed that \"FOX News Media has already been in full compliance across the board, but [settled] to continue enacting extensive preventive measures against all forms of discrimination and harassment.\"\nClimate denial and misinformation.\nDuring the May 22, 2023, episode of Fox News Tonight, discussing Roman climate protesters drawing attention on drought and floods in Italy, the correspondent Trace Gallagher downplayed the role of climate change for the recent meteorological situation pointing at Italian history.\nInternational transmission.\nThe Fox News Channel feed has international availability via multiple providers, while \"Fox Extra\" segments provide alternate programming. Fox News is carried in more than 40 countries.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, FNC is broadcast on the dominant pay television provider Foxtel, which is 65% owned by News Corp Australia, the Australian arm of News Corp and the sister company of FNC-owner Fox Corporation. Local cable news channel Sky News Australia is wholly owned by News Corp Australia and is therefore FNC's de facto sister channel, although has formal partnerships with FNC competitor CNN as well as both ABC News and CBS News.\nBrazil.\nFNC reached Brazil through Sky Brasil on November 1, 2002, after being introduced at ABTA 2002. On January 8, 2003, Sky Brasil added interactive functions for the channel exclusively from the provider.\nCommercials on FNC are replaced with \"Fox Extra\". It is available on Vivo TV.\nCanada.\nFox had initially planned to launch a joint venture with Canwest's Global Television Network, tentatively named Fox News Canada, which would have featured a mixture of U.S. and Canadian news programming (MSNBC had backed a similar venture with Rogers and Shaw). As a result, the CRTC denied a 2003 application requesting permission for Fox News Channel to be carried in Canada. However, in March 2004, a Fox executive said the venture had been shelved; in November of that year, the CRTC added Fox News to its whitelist of foreign channels that may be carried by television providers.\nIn May 2023, the CRTC announced that it would open a public consultation regarding the channel's carriage in Canada, acting upon complaints by the LGBT advocacy group Egale Canada surrounding a March 2023 episode of \"Tucker Carlson Tonight\" that contained content described as \"malicious misinformation\" regarding trans, non-binary, gender non-conforming, and two-spirit communities, including \"the inflammatory and false claim that trans people are 'targeting' Christians.\"\nFrance.\nFox News is available on cable through French Internet provider Free on channel 352. As of Spring 2017, the channel was no longer found on the provider Orange's lineup.\nIndia.\nIt is available through streaming service Disney+ Hotstar (formerly owned by FNC parent company 21st Century Fox).\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, it is available on Channel 397 on pay-TV provider First Media.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, FNC is broadcast on Channel 105 of the satellite provider Yes, as well as being carried on Cellcom TV and Partner TV. It is also broadcast on channel 200 on cable operator HOT.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, FNC is broadcast on Sky Italia. Fox News was launched on Stream TV in 2001, and moved to Sky Italia in 2003.\nJapan.\nAlthough service to Japan ceased in summer 2003, it can still be seen on Americable (distributor for American bases), Mediatti (Kadena Air Base) and Pan Global TV Japan.\nMexico.\nThe channel's international feed is being carried by cable provider Izzi Telecom.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, Fox News has been carried by cable providers UPC Nederland and CASEMA, and satellite provider Canaldigitaal; all have dropped the channel in recent years. At this time, only cable provider Caiway (available in a limited number of towns in the central part of the country) is broadcasting the channel. The channel was also carried by IPTV provider KNIPPR (owned by T-Mobile).\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, FNC is broadcast on Channel 088 of pay satellite operator SKY Network Television's digital platform. It was formerly broadcast overnight on free-to-air UHF New Zealand TV channel Prime (owned by SKY); this was discontinued in January 2010, reportedly due to an expiring broadcasting license. Fox News' former parent company News Corporation had a stake in both SKY and Prime until 2014.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, Fox News Channel is available on PTCL Smart TV and a number of cable and IPTV operators.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Fox News Channel is available on Sky Cable Channels 138 (Metro Manila) and 510 (Regional), Cablelink Channel 224 (Metro Manila) and G Sat Channel 50. It was available on Cignal Channel 131 until January 1, 2021, due to contract expiration; however, the channel returned on June 16, 2022.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, Fox News was available on Meo. The channel is however no longer available on the operator and it is not carried by other Portuguese TV operators.\nScandinavia.\nBetween 2003 and 2006, in Sweden and the other Scandinavian countries, FNC was broadcast 16 hours a day on TV8 (with \"Fox News Extra\" segments replacing U.S. advertising). Fox News was dropped by TV8 and replaced by German news channel Deutsche Welle in September 2006.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, FNC is broadcast on Channel 702 on pay-TV operator StarHub TV, as well on Channel 165 on Singtel TV. Both providers also broadcast its sister channel, Sky News.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, FNC is broadcast on StarSat.\nThe most popular pay television operator, DStv, does not offer FNC in its channel bouquet.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, Fox News was available on Movistar Plus+. The channel was part of the operator since its first incarnation as Canal Satellite Digital in the early 2000s, but was later removed from the operator's satellite offer by March 2023, and ceased transmission to the remaining offers on July 9, 2024. The channel is not carried by other Spanish TV operators.\nUnited Kingdom and Ireland.\nFNC was carried in the United Kingdom by Sky, which was 40-percent owned by 21st Century Fox at the time, and operates its own domestic news channel Sky News. On August 29, 2017, Sky dropped Fox News; the broadcaster said its carriage was not \"commercially viable\" due to average viewership of fewer than 2,000 viewers per day. The company said the decision was unrelated to 21st Century Fox's proposed acquisition of the remainder of Sky plc (which ultimately led to a bidding war that resulted in its acquisition by Comcast instead).\nThe potential co-ownership had prompted concerns from critics of the deal, who felt Sky News could similarly undergo a shift to an opinionated format with a right-wing viewpoint. However, such a move would violate Ofcom broadcast codes, which requires all news programming to show due impartiality. The channel's broadcasts in the country have violated this rule on several occasions, while the channel also violated election silence rules by broadcasting analysis of the 2016 Brexit referendum while polls were still open (the channel was blacked out while polls were open during the 2017 general election to comply with the rule)."}
{"id": "11122", "revid": "5532431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11122", "title": "Freeciv", "text": "Freeciv is a single- and multiplayer turn-based strategy game for workstations and personal computers inspired by the proprietary \"Sid Meier's Civilization\" series. It is available for most desktop computer operating systems and available in an online browser version. Released under the GNU GPL-2.0-or-later, \"Freeciv\" is free and open-source software. The game's default settings are closest to \"Civilization II\", in both gameplay and graphics, including the units and the isometric grid. However, with a lot of multiplayer games being played in longturn communities, rulesets and additional variants have evolved away from the original ruleset. \"Freeciv\" is playable online on various public and private servers.\nPlayers take the role of tribal leaders in 4000 B.C. who must guide their peoples through the centuries. Over time, new technologies are discovered, which allow the construction of new city buildings and the deployment of new units. Players can wage war on one another or form diplomatic relationships.\nThe game ends when one civilization has eradicated all others or accomplished the goal of space colonization, or at a given deadline. If more than one civilization remains at the deadline, the player with the highest score wins. Points are awarded for the size of a civilization, its wealth, and cultural and scientific advances.\nHistory.\nAt the computer science department at Aarhus University, three students, avid players of \"XPilot\" and of Sid Meier's \"Civilization\", which was a stand-alone PC game for MS-DOS, decided to find out whether the two could be fused into an X-based multiplayer \"Civilization\"-like strategy game. The students\u2014Peter Unold, Claus Leth Gregersen and Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg\u2014started development in November 1995; the first playable version was released in January 1996, with bugfixing and small enhancements until April. The rules of the game were close to \"Civilization\", while the client/server architecture was basically that of \"XPilot\".\nFor the developers, \"Freeciv\" 1.0 was a successful proof of concept, but a rather boring game, so they went back to \"XPilot\". Other players and developers took over; they made the game available on many other operating systems, including Linux, Solaris, Ultrix, AmigaOS, and Microsoft Windows. Linux distributions started to include \"Freeciv\".\nThe main development goal remained to make a \"Civilization\"-like game playable over the Internet, with participants on different continents, even when connected with 14400 bit/s modems. \"Freeciv\" achieved this by using an asynchronous client-server protocol: during each turn, human users play concurrently, and their actions are sent to the server for processing without awaiting the results. This kept the game playable with network latency up to a few hundreds of milliseconds.\nIn 1998, computer players were added; they could soon beat newcomers to the game with ease, using only minor forms of cheating. Computer players are implemented directly in the server; they do not play concurrently with human players, but separately, in between turns.\nThe game grew in popularity. A public server was installed on which games could be played around the clock; it retained the games and published a post-game analysis webpage with per-player statistics and an animated map replay.\nSubsequent 1.x releases improved the GUI, improved the gameplay, optimized playability over poor connections, and added many small features. Over time, the winning strategy proved to be \"city smallpox\", i.e. sprawling the map with many small cities as fast as possible; whoever could develop fastest would win the game, and growing and developing individual cities was not worthwhile.\nIn practice, from around 2002, experienced players would form teams at the start of the game; a fork of \"Freeciv\" included specific features for team play.\nVersion 2.0, released in 2005, introduced several important changes. New team playing features and advanced diplomacy made cooperative gaming more attractive. Adjustments to various costs and benefits put an end to the dominance of the city smallpox strategy that left many of the game's features unused; developing one's empire now necessitated a careful plan for city development, including the use of trade routes and phases of \"rapture\", in which city populations grow quickly, under relatively peaceful conditions. As a result, multiplayer games were almost always played in teams and typically took longer to finish when compared to 1.x games.\nIn 2006, TCP and UDP port number 5556 was assigned to \"Freeciv\" by IANA. In 2017, after being hosted on Gna! for 15 years, \"Freeciv\" moved its source repository to GitHub.\nReception and impact.\nIn 2000, CNN placed \"Freeciv\" among the \"Top 10 Linux games for the holidays\". In 2005, in an O'Reilly article on \"Open Source Mac Gaming\", \"Freeciv\" was recommended. In 2008, \"APC\" named Freeciv among the \"Top 5 best (free) open source games\". \"Linux Format\" selected it as \"HotPick\" in April 2010 and in October 2014.\n\"Freeciv\" was described as an example in \"The Art of Unix Programming\" by Eric S. Raymond. Studies and courses have used \"Freeciv\" as a platform for experimenting with the design and programming of intelligent agents.\nDesign.\nFreeciv is very configurable, down to the specific rules, so it can be played in Freeciv (default) mode, \"Civilization\" mode, \"Civilization II\" mode, or a custom mode. One or several players act as game administrators and can configure the game rules. Typically modified rules are:\nIn order to play a game of Freeciv, a user must start up a Freeciv client and connect it to a Freeciv server. Initially, the server is in pre-game phase; in this phase, clients can connect and game configuration parameters can be changed. At some point, the server may be ordered to start a game; in response, it creates game players (nations) and the game map, and assigns every player to either a Freeciv client or a computer player, as specified by the configuration. From that point on, the game will run until it ends or is terminated; the server can never get back into pre-game state. The user can also start a game directly from the client: this automatically starts a Freeciv server, connects to it and starts the game.\nFeatures.\nFreeciv's graphics system is configurable: originally, map display was always in overhead mode (like in \"Civ I\"). Isometric mode (like in \"Civ II\" and \"III\") and optionally hexagonal tiling (like in \"Civ V\" and \"VI\") were added later. In both modes, look can be further customized by switching to an alternative set of graphics (called a \"tileset\"). The sounds can be replaced as well. Freeciv supports human-to-human multiplayer gameplay and artificial intelligence (AI) computer players. While the game is turn based, human players move simultaneously. The AI players move separately, partly at the start of a turn, partly at the end.\nIn releases before 2.0, AI players could not engage in diplomatic relationships with human players. Under the current releases, AI players will engage in a very predictable, rules-based diplomacy. Version 2.2.0 included a map editor, termed Civworld. It can create new scenarios, as well as edit the map currently being played. Basic scripting is available with Freeciv, but is not available in Civworld. Version 2.3 increased the limit of players from 30 to 126.\nThere are different clients available SDL, GTK+ (version3) and Xaw3D A Qt client was added in version 2.5. The Freeciv interface is available in over 30 different languages. The addition of Gaelic was covered on BBC TV.\nPorts and variants.\nOriginally developed on IRIX, Freeciv has been ported to many different operating systems: it is distributed with many Linux distributions, offers installers for Microsoft Windows, and has been known to run on Mac OS X, MorphOS, Solaris, Ultrix, QNX, OS/2, Cygwin, AmigaOS, AROS, RISC OS, Maemo, ZETA, SkyOS, various BSDs, and smartphones and tablets running Android.\nBetween version 2.4 and version 3.1 Mac OS X was not supported, but returned in March of 2023. As of version 2.3, Windows versions older than Windows XP SP3 are no longer supported. Freeciv is available in the PortableApps format.\nFreeciv21.\nFreeciv21 is a fork of the original Freeciv project started with the intention of modernizing the code and the client interface, and also adjusting the software more to the needs of multiplayer longturn variant. It was started by enthusiasts within the Longturn.net community. As of January 2023 it is in late developing stage. The first standard Longturn game played on Fc21 software was LT75, started in November 2022.\nfciv.net.\nFciv.net is a web-based variant of Freeciv which focuses on 3D graphics. It uses the Three.js 3D engine. the site is not working.\nfreecivx.net.\nFreecivx.net is a free-to-play variant of Freeciv which focuses on 3D graphics. It uses the Three.js 3D engine and OpenAI for AI/LLM chat in-game assistance. Freecivx has a Java client and server in development.\nFreeciv-web.\nFreeciv-web is a version of Freeciv playable online in any modern web browser. It supports 2D isometric graphics or 3D graphics using WebGL. The game is a fork of the Freeciv project, with the goal of redesigning the desktop game into a version which can be played online. Freeciv-web introduced several new features, such as play-by-email support freely available to anyone online, and support for playing the game on any real-world map location by choosing a map using Mapbox, which is not available in commercial games in the genre. The game's default settings are closest to \"Civilization II\", both in gameplay and graphics (including the units and the isometric grid). The proposal to create a web-version of Freeciv was made 6 April 2007 on the Freeciv mailing lists, and documented on the Freeciv.org wiki. Freeciv-web was originally created by Andreas R\u00f8sdal, but is now maintained by several Freeciv developers on GitHub.\nFreeciv-web is free and open-source software. The Freeciv C server is released under the GNU General Public License, while the Freeciv-web client is released under the GNU Affero General Public License. Freeciv-web supports human-to-human multiplayer gameplay and artificial intelligence (AI) computer players. Its features are similar to the Freeciv C client, although not all of the user-interface has been ported from the C client yet.\nThe Freeciv-web server on play.freeciv.org was shut down in March 2018, but the project was revived by a group of volunteers on freecivweb.org. Freeciv-web can be played online at a number of servers such as freecivweb.org. All the features required to play a full game of Freeciv are in place. Most servers offer multiple varieties of the game: single-player, multiplayer free-for-all, play-by-email and longturn.\nLongturn variants.\nFreeciv \"Longturn\" is a specialized large-group-multiplayer-online-strategy variant of Freeciv featuring daylong game turns with large amounts of human opponents per map, allowing for optimal timing to build up strategic plans and readapt them to the circumstances of each turn. Matches can last anytime from a few weeks to months, and commonly involve 20 to 30 players in each one.\nLongturn's first game, now called LT0, started around 2004 on the Polish Civilization fanpage civ.org.pl and is now conducted at Longturn.net. It was decided that the game is a bit too slow-paced, so a new \"3X movement\" ruleset was devised \u2013 basically, all units had their movement points and vision radius tripled. As of December 2022, the latest game was LT76. Changes to settings or rulesets are discussed in the Longturn forum. and, recently, Longturn Discord server where the community is currently centered. There is ongoing development of a few non-standard rulesets specifically adjusted for longturn multiplayer games, diverging from the rules of the original Civilization which was created as a single-player game.\n\"Greatturn\" was a similar concept on another server. \"FreeCivWeb.org\" also offers longturn games (more than fifty have been played before mid-2021) with a multiplayer ruleset which is documented in great detail.\n\"Power of Planets \u2013 Earth\" (formerly known as \"GaCivs\") is a free-to-play MMO-RTS variant based on FreeCiv. The ruleset was devised to support long-term time-based gameplay instead of turn-based strategy."}
{"id": "11123", "revid": "16535251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11123", "title": "Fornax", "text": "Fornax () is a constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere, partly ringed by the celestial river Eridanus. Its name is Latin for furnace. It was named by French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in 1756. Fornax is one of the 88 modern constellations.\nThe three brightest stars\u2014Alpha, Beta and Nu Fornacis\u2014form a flattened triangle facing south. With an apparent magnitude of 3.91, Alpha Fornacis is the brightest star in Fornax. Six star systems have been found to have exoplanets. The Fornax Dwarf galaxy is a small faint satellite galaxy of the Milky Way. NGC 1316 is a relatively close radio galaxy. \nThe Hubble's Ultra-Deep Field is located within Fornax. \nIt is the 41st largest constellation in the night-sky, occupying an area of 398 square degrees. It is located in the first quadrant of the southern hemisphere (SQ1) and can be seen at latitudes between +50\u00b0 and -90\u00b0 during the month of December.\nHistory.\nThe French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille first described the constellation in French as \"le Fourneau Chymique\" (the Chemical Furnace) with an alembic and receiver in his early catalogue, before abbreviating it to \"le Fourneau\" on his planisphere in 1752, after he had observed and catalogued almost 10,000 southern stars during a two-year stay at the Cape of Good Hope. He devised fourteen new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe. All but one honoured instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment. Lacaille Latinised the name to \"Fornax Chimiae\" on his 1763 chart.\nCharacteristics.\nThe constellation Eridanus borders Fornax to the east, north and south, while Cetus, Sculptor and Phoenix gird it to the north, west and south respectively. Covering 397.5\u00a0square degrees and 0.964% of the night sky, it ranks 41st of the 88 constellations in size, The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"For\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 8 segments (\"illustrated in infobox\"). In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between and , while the declination coordinates are between \u221223.76\u00b0 and \u221239.58\u00b0. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 50\u00b0N.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nLacaille gave Bayer designations to 27 stars now named Alpha to Omega Fornacis, labelling two stars 3.5 degrees apart as Gamma, three stars Eta, two stars Iota, two Lambda and three Chi. Phi Fornacis was added by Gould, and Theta and Omicron were dropped by Gould and Baily respectively. Upsilon, too, was later found to be two stars and designated as such. Overall, there are 59 stars within the constellation's borders brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5. However, there are no stars brighter than the fourth magnitude.\nThe three brightest stars form a flattish triangle, with Alpha (also called Dalim) and Nu Fornacis marking its eastern and western points and Beta Fornacis marking the shallow southern apex. Originally designated 12 Eridani by John Flamsteed, Alpha Fornacis was named by Lacaille as the brightest star in the new constellation. It is a binary star that can be resolved by small amateur telescopes. With an apparent magnitude of 3.91, the primary is a yellow-white subgiant 1.21 times as massive as the Sun that has begun to cool and expand after exhausting its core hydrogen, having swollen to 1.9 times the Sun's radius. Of magnitude 6.5, the secondary star is 0.78 times as massive as the Sun. It has been identified as a blue straggler, and has either accumulated material from, or merged with, a third star in the past. It is a strong source of X-rays. The pair is 46.4 \u00b1 0.3 light-years distant from Earth.\nBeta Fornacis is a yellow-hued giant star of spectral type G8IIIb of magnitude 4.5 that has cooled and swelled to 11 times the Sun's diameter, 178 \u00b1 2 light-years from Earth. It is a red clump giant, which means it has undergone helium flash and is currently generating energy through the fusion of helium at its core.\nNu Fornacis is 370 \u00b1 10 light-years distant from Earth. It is a blue giant star of spectral type B9.5IIIspSi that is 3.65 \u00b1 0.18 times as massive and around 245 times as luminous as the Sun, with 3.2 \u00b1 0.4 times its diameter. It varies in luminosity over a period of 1.89 days\u2014the same as its rotational period. This is because of differences in abundances of metals in its atmosphere; it belongs to a class of star known as an Alpha2 Canum Venaticorum variable.\nShining with an apparent magnitude of 5.89, Epsilon Fornacis is a binary star system located 104.4 \u00b1 0.3 light-years distant from Earth. Its component stars orbit each other every 37 years. The primary star is around 12 billion years old and has cooled and expanded to 2.53 times the diameter of the Sun, while having only 91% of its mass.\n Omega Fornacis is a binary star system composed of a blue main-sequence star of spectral type B9.5V and magnitude 4.96, and a white main sequence star of spectral type A7V and magnitude 7.88. The system is 470 \u00b1 10 light-years distant from Earth.\nKappa Fornacis is a triple star system composed of a yellow giant and a pair of red dwarfs.\nR Fornacis is a long-period variable and carbon star.\nLP 944-20 is a brown dwarf of spectral type M9 that has around 7% the mass of the Sun. Approximately 21 light-years distant from Earth, it is a faint object with an apparent magnitude of 18.69. Observations published in 2007 showed that the atmosphere of LP 944-20 contains much lithium and that it has dusty clouds. Smaller and less luminous still is 2MASS 0243-2453, a T-type brown dwarf of spectral type T6. With a surface temperature of 1040\u20131100 K, it has 2.4\u20134.1% the mass of the Sun, a diameter 9.2 to 10.6% of that of the Sun, and an age of 0.4\u20131.7 billion years.\nSix star systems in Fornax have been found to have planets:\nDeep-sky objects.\nLocal Group\nNGC 1049 is a globular cluster 500,000 light-years from Earth. It is in the Fornax Dwarf Galaxy. NGC 1360 is a planetary nebula in Fornax with a magnitude of approximately 9.0, 1,280 light-years from Earth. Its central star is of magnitude 11.4, an unusually bright specimen. It is five times the size of the famed Ring Nebula in Lyra at 6.5 arcminutes. Unlike the Ring Nebula, NGC 1360 is clearly elliptical.\nThe Fornax Dwarf galaxy is a dwarf galaxy that is part of the Local Group of galaxies. It is not visible in amateur telescopes, despite its relatively small distance of 500,000 light-years.\nHelmi stream is a small galactic stream in Fornax. This small galaxy was destroyed by Milky Way 6 billion years ago. There was candidate for extragalactic planet, HIP 13044 b.\nOutside\nNGC 1097 is a barred spiral galaxy in Fornax, about 45 million light-years from Earth. At magnitude 9, it is visible in medium amateur telescopes. It is notable as a Seyfert galaxy with strong spectral emissions indicating ionized gases and a central supermassive black hole.\nFornax Cluster\nThe Fornax Cluster is a cluster of galaxies lying at a distance of 19 megaparsecs (62 million light-years). It is the second richest galaxy cluster within 100 million light-years, after the considerably larger Virgo Cluster, and may be associated with the nearby Eridanus Group. It lies primarily in the constellation Fornax, with its southern boundaries partially crossing into the constellation of Eridanus, and covers an area of sky about 6\u00b0 across or about 28 sq degrees. The Fornax cluster is a part of larger Fornax Wall. Down are some famous objects in this cluster:\nNGC 1365 is another barred spiral galaxy located at a distance of 56 million light-years from Earth. Like NGC 1097, it is also a Seyfert galaxy. Its bar is a center of star formation and shows extensions of the spiral arms' dust lanes. The bright nucleus indicates the presence of an active galactic nucleus \u2013 a galaxy with a supermassive black hole at the center, accreting matter from the bar. It is a 10th magnitude galaxy associated with the Fornax Cluster.\nFornax A is a radio galaxy with extensive radio lobes that corresponds to the optical galaxy NGC 1316, a 9th-magnitude galaxy. One of the closer active galaxies to Earth at a distance of 62 million light-years, Fornax A appears in the optical spectrum as a large elliptical galaxy with dust lanes near its core. These dust lanes have caused astronomers to discern that it recently merged with a small spiral galaxy. Because it has a high rate of type Ia supernovae, NGC 1316 has been used to determine the size of the universe. The jets producing the radio lobes are not particularly powerful, giving the lobes a more diffuse, knotted structure due to interactions with the intergalactic medium. Associated with this peculiar galaxy is an entire cluster of galaxies.\nNGC 1399 is a large elliptical galaxy in the Southern constellation Fornax, the central galaxy in the Fornax cluster.\nThe galaxy is 66 million light-years away from Earth. With a diameter of 130 000 light-years, it is one of the largest galaxies in the Fornax cluster and slightly larger than Milky Way. William Herschel discovered this galaxy on October 22, 1835.\nNGC 1386 is a spiral galaxy located in the constellation Eridanus. It is located at a distance of circa 53 million light years from Earth and has apparent dimensions of 3.89' x 1.349'. It is a Seyfert galaxy, the only one in Fornax Cluster.\nNGC 1427A is an irregular galaxy in the constellation Eridanus. Its distance modulus has been estimated using the globular cluster luminosity function to be 31.01 \u00b1 0.21 which is about 52 Mly. It is the brightest dwarf irregular member of the Fornax cluster and is in the foreground of the cluster's central galaxy NGC 1399.\nNGC 1460 is a barred lenticular galaxy in the constellation Eridanus. It was discovered by John Herschel on November 28, 1837. It is moving away from the Milky Way 1341\u00a0km/s. NGC 1460 has a Hubble classification of SB0, which indicates it is a barred lenticular galaxy. But, this one contains a huge bar at its core. The bar is spreading from center to the edge of the galaxy, as seen on Hubble image in the box. This bar is one of the largest seen in barred lenticular galaxies.\nThere are also first ultracompact dwarf galaxies discovered.\nDistant universe\nFornax has been the target of investigations into the furthest reaches of the universe. The Hubble Ultra Deep Field is located within Fornax, and the Fornax Cluster, a small cluster of galaxies, lies primarily within Fornax. At a meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in Britain, a team from University of Queensland described 40 unknown \"dwarf\" galaxies in this constellation; follow-up observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope revealed that ultra compact dwarfs are much smaller than previously known dwarf galaxies, about across.\nUDFj-39546284 is a candidate protogalaxy located in Fornax, although recent analyses have suggested it is likely to be a lower redshift source.\nGRB 190114C was a notable gamma ray burst explosion from a galaxy 4.5 billion light years away near the Fornax constellation, that was initially detected in January 2019. According to astronomers, \"the brightest light ever seen from Earth [to date] ... [the] biggest explosion in the Universe since the Big Bang\".\nEquivalents.\nIn Chinese astronomy, the stars that correspond to Fornax are within the White Tiger of the West (\u897f\u65b9\u767d\u864e, \"X\u012b F\u0101ng B\u00e1i H\u01d4\")."}
{"id": "11125", "revid": "46858757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11125", "title": "Francesco Borromini", "text": "Francesco Borromini (, ), byname of Francesco Castelli (; 25 September 1599 \u2013 2 August 1667), was an Italian architect born in the modern Swiss canton of Ticino who, with his contemporaries Gian Lorenzo Bernini and Pietro da Cortona, was a leading figure in the emergence of Roman Baroque architecture.\nA keen student of the architecture of Michelangelo and the ruins of Antiquity, Borromini developed an inventive and distinctive, if somewhat idiosyncratic, architecture employing manipulations of Classical architectural forms, geometrical rationales in his plans and symbolic meanings in his buildings. He seems to have had a sound understanding of structures, which perhaps Bernini and Cortona, who were principally trained in other areas of the visual arts, lacked. His soft lead drawings are particularly distinctive. He appears to have been a self-taught scholar, amassing a large library by the end of his life.\nHis career was constrained by his personality. Unlike Bernini who easily adopted the mantle of the charming courtier in his pursuit of important commissions, Borromini was both melancholic and quick in temper which resulted in his withdrawing from certain jobs. His conflicted character led him to a death by suicide in 1667.\nProbably because his work was idiosyncratic, his subsequent influence was not widespread but is apparent in the Piedmontese works of Guarino Guarini and, as a fusion with the architectural modes of Bernini and Cortona, in the late Baroque architecture of Northern Europe. Later critics of the Baroque, such as Francesco Milizia and the English architect Sir John Soane, were particularly critical of Borromini's work. From the late nineteenth century onwards, interest has revived in the works of Borromini and his architecture has become appreciated for its inventiveness.\nEarly life and first works.\nBorromini was born at Bissone, near Lugano in today's Ticino, which was at the time a bailiwick of the Swiss Confederacy. He was the son of a stonemason and began his career as a stonemason himself. He soon went to Milan to study and practice his craft. He moved to Rome in 1619 and started working for Carlo Maderno, his distant relative, at St. Peter's and then also at the Palazzo Barberini. When Maderno died in 1629, he and Pietro da Cortona continued to work on the palace under the direction of Bernini. Once he had become established in Rome, he changed his name from Castelli to Borromini, a name deriving from his mother's family and perhaps also out of regard for St Charles Borromeo.\nMajor works.\nSan Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (San Carlino).\nIn 1634, Borromini received his first major independent commission to design the church, cloister and monastic buildings of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (also known as San Carlino). Situated on the Quirinal Hill in Rome, the complex was designed for the Spanish Trinitarians, a religious order. The monastic buildings and the cloister were completed first after which construction of the church took place during the period 1638-1641 and in 1646 it was dedicated to San Carlo Borromeo. The church is considered by many to be an exemplary masterpiece of Roman Baroque architecture. San Carlino is remarkably small given its significance to Baroque architecture; it has been noted that the whole building would fit into one of the dome piers of Saint Peter's. \nThe site was not an easy one; it was a corner site and the space was limited. Borromini positioned the church on the corner of two intersecting roads. Although the idea for the serpentine fa\u00e7ade must have been conceived fairly early on, probably in the mid-1630s, it was only constructed towards the end of Borromini's life and the upper part was not completed until after the architect's death.\nBorromini devised the complex ground plan of the church from interlocking geometrical configurations, a typical Borromini device for constructing plans. The resulting effect is that the interior lower walls appear to weave in and out, partly alluding to a cross form, partly to a hexagonal form and partly to an oval form; geometrical figures that are all found explicitly in the dome above. The area of the pendentives marks the transition from the lower wall order to the oval opening of the dome. Illuminated by windows hidden from a viewer below, interlocking octagons, crosses and hexagons diminish in size as the dome rises to a lantern with the symbol of the Trinity.\nOratory of Saint Philip Neri (Oratorio dei Filippini).\nIn the late sixteenth century, the Congregation of the Filippini (also known as the Oratorians) rebuilt the church of Santa Maria in Vallicella (known as the Chiesa Nuova -new church) in central Rome. In the 1620s, on a site adjacent to the church, the Fathers commissioned designs for their own residence and for an oratory (or \"oratorio\" in Italian) in which to hold their spiritual exercises. These exercises combined preaching and music in a form which became immensely popular and highly influential on the development of the musical oratorio.\nThe architect Paolo Maruscelli drew up plans for the site (which survive) and the sacristy was begun in 1629 and was in use by 1635. After a substantial benefaction in January 1637, however, Borromini was appointed as architect. By 1640, the oratory was in use, a taller and richer clock tower was accepted, and by 1643, the relocated library was complete. The striking brick curved fa\u00e7ade adjacent to the church entrance has an unusual pediment and does not entirely correspond to the oratory room behind it. The white oratory interior has a ribbed vault and a complex wall arrangement of engaged pilasters along with freestanding columns supporting first-level balconies. The altar wall was substantially reworked at a later date.\nBorromini's relations with the Oratorians were often fraught; there were heated arguments over the design and the selection of building materials. By 1650, the situation came to a head and in 1652 the Oratorians appointed another architect.\nHowever, with the help of his Oratorian friend and provost Virgilio Spada, Borromini documented his own account of the building of the oratory and the residence and an illustrated version was published in Italian in 1725 \nSant'Ivo alla Sapienza.\nFrom 1640 to 1650, he worked on the design of the church of Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza and its courtyard, near University of Rome La Sapienza palace. It was initially the church of the Roman Archiginnasio. He had been initially recommended for the commission in 1632, by his then-supervisor for the work at the Palazzo Barberini, Gian Lorenzo Bernini. The site, like many in cramped Rome, is challenged by external perspectives. It was built at the end of Giacomo della Porta's long courtyard. The dome and cochlear steeple are peculiar, and reflect the idiosyncratic architectural motifs that distinguish Borromini from contemporaries. Inside, the nave has an unusual centralized plan circled by alternating concave and convex-ending cornices, leading to a dome decorated with linear arrays of stars and putti. The geometry of the structure is a symmetric six-pointed star; from the centre of the floor, the cornice looks like two equilateral triangles forming a hexagon, but three of the points are clover-like, while the other three are concavely clipped. The innermost columns are points on a circle. The fusion of feverish and dynamic baroque excesses with rationalistic geometry is an excellent match for a church in a papal institution of higher learning.\nSant'Agnese in Agone.\nBorromini was one of several architects involved in the building of the church of Sant\u2019Agnese in Agone in Rome. Not only were some of his design intentions changed by succeeding architects but the net result is a building which reflects, rather unhappily, a mix of different approaches.\nThe decision to rebuild the church was taken in 1652 as part of Pope Innocent X's project to enhance the Piazza Navona, the urban space onto which his family palace, the Palazzo Pamphili, faced. The first plans for a Greek Cross church were drawn up by Girolamo Rainaldi and his son Carlo Rainaldi, who relocated the main entrance from the Via di Santa Maria dell'Anima to the Piazza Navona. The foundations were laid and much of the lower level walls had been constructed when the Rainaldis were dismissed due to criticisms of the design and Borromini was appointed in their stead.\nBorromini began a much more innovative approach to the fa\u00e7ade which was expanded to include parts of the adjacent Palazzo Pamphili and gain space for his two bell towers. Construction of the fa\u00e7ade proceeded up to the cornice level and the dome completed as far as the lantern. On the interior, he placed columns against the piers of the lower order which was mainly completed.\nIn 1655, Innocent X died and the project lost momentum. In 1657, Borromini resigned and Carlo Rainaldi was recalled who made a number of significant changes to Borromini's design. Further alterations were made by Bernini including the fa\u00e7ade pediment. In 1668, Carlo Rainaldi returned as architect and Ciro Ferri received the commission to fresco the dome interior which it is highly unlikely that Borromini intended. Further large-scale statuary and coloured marbling were also added; again, these are not part of Borromini's design repertoire which was orientated to white stucco architectural and symbolic motifs.\nThe Re Magi Chapel of the Propaganda Fide.\nThe College of the Propagation of the Faith or Propaganda Fide in Rome includes the Re Magi Chapel by Borromini, generally considered by architectural historians to be one of his most spatially unified architectural interiors.\nThe chapel replaced a small oval chapel designed by his rival Bernini and was a late work in Borromini's career; he was appointed as architect in 1648 but it was not until 1660 that construction of the chapel began and although the main body of work was completed by 1665, some of the decoration was finished after his death.\nHis fa\u00e7ade to the Via di Propaganda Fide comprises seven bays articulated by giant pilasters. The central bay is a concave curve and accommodates the main entry into the college courtyard and complex, with the entrance to the chapel to the left and to the college to the right.\nOther works.\nBorromini's works include:\nDeath and epitaph.\nIn the summer of 1667, and following the completion of the Falconieri chapel (the High Altar chapel) in San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, Borromini committed suicide in Rome by drawing his sword, resting the hilt against his bed, and falling on it \"with such force that it ran into [his] body, from one side to the other\" This was possibly as a result of nervous disorders and depression. The architect named cardinal Ulderico Carpegna executor of his will and bequeathed him money and objects of considerable value \"for\", as he wrote, \"the infinite debt I have toward him\". The prelate was a former patron who had commissioned Borromini important works of transformation and expansion of his palace at Fontana di Trevi. In his testament, Borromini wrote that he did not want any name on his burial and expressed the desire to be buried in the tomb of his kinsman Carlo Maderno in San Giovanni dei Fiorentini.\nIn recent times (in 1955), his name was added to the marble plaque below the tomb of Maderno and a commemorative plaque commissioned by the Swiss embassy in Rome was placed on a pillar of the church. This Latin inscription reads:\nThe adjective \"Ticinensis\" used in the plaque is an anachronism, since the name, related to the Ticino river, was chosen only in 1803, when the modern Canton was created by Napoleon.\nHonours.\nThis decision at that time caused polemics in Switzerland, started by the Swiss-Italian art historian Piero Bianconi. According to him, since in 17th century the territories which in 1803 became the Canton Ticino were Italian possessions of some Swiss cantons (Condominiums of the Twelve Cantons), Borromini could neither be defined Ticinese nor Swiss. The architect was also featured on the 7th series, which was a reserve emission and was never released. The reverse of both series shows architectural details from some of his major works."}
{"id": "11126", "revid": "35874198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11126", "title": "Freedom fighter", "text": "A freedom fighter is a person engaged in a struggle to achieve political freedom, particularly against an established government. The term is typically reserved for those who are actively involved in armed or otherwise violent rebellion.\nTerminology.\nGenerally speaking, freedom fighters are people who use physical force to cause a change in the political and or social order. Notable examples include uMkhonto we Sizwe in South Africa, the Sons of Liberty in the American Revolution, the Irish Republican Army in Ireland and Northern Ireland, the Eritrean People's Liberation Front in Eritrea, the Mukti Bahini in Bangladesh Liberation War, and the National Resistance Army in Uganda, which were considered freedom fighters by supporters. However, a person who is campaigning for freedom through peaceful means may still be classed as a freedom fighter, though in common usage they are called political activists, as in the case of the Black Consciousness Movement. In India, \"Freedom fighter\" is an officially recognized category by the Indian government covering those who took part in the country's independence movement; people in this category, which can also include dependant family members, get pensions and other benefits like special railway counters.\nPeople who are described as \"freedom fighters\" are often also referenced as assassins, rebels, insurgents, or terrorists. This leads to the aphorism \"One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter\". The degree to which this occurs depends on a variety of factors specific to the struggle in which a given freedom fighter group in engaged. During the Cold War, \"freedom fighter\" was first used with reference to the Hungarian rebels in 1956. Ronald Reagan picked up the term to explain America's support of rebels in countries controlled by communist states or otherwise perceived to be under the influence of the Soviet Union, including the Contras in Nicaragua, UNITA in Angola and the multi-factional mujahideen in Afghanistan. \nA freedom fighter is different from a mercenary as they gain no direct material benefit from being involved in a conflict, though they may have no personal reason for being involved. Thus they are not considered mercenaries under the Geneva Convention and thus may in certain circumstances be protected by it (Mercenaries are not protected under the Geneva Convention and can be tried as criminals). In the media, the BBC tries to avoid the phrases \"terrorist\" or \"freedom fighter\", except in attributed quotes, in favor of more neutral terms such as \"militant\", \"guerrilla\", \"assassin\", \"insurgent\", \"rebel\", \"paramilitary\", or \"militia\"."}
{"id": "11127", "revid": "49113913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11127", "title": "Federal Bureau of Investigation", "text": "The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is the domestic intelligence and security service of the United States and its principal federal law enforcement agency. An agency of the United States Department of Justice, the FBI is a member of the U.S. Intelligence Community and reports to both the attorney general and the director of national intelligence. A leading American counterterrorism, counterintelligence, and criminal investigative organization, the FBI has jurisdiction over violations of more than 200 categories of federal crimes.\nAlthough many of the FBI's functions are unique, its activities in support of national security are comparable to those of the British MI5 and NCA, the New Zealand GCSB and the Russian FSB. Unlike the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which has no law enforcement authority and is focused on intelligence collection abroad, the FBI is primarily a domestic agency, maintaining 56 field offices in major cities throughout the United States, and more than 400 resident agencies in smaller cities and areas across the nation. At an FBI field office, a senior-level FBI officer concurrently serves as the representative of the director of national intelligence.\nDespite its domestic focus, the FBI also maintains a significant international footprint, operating 60 Legal Attache (LEGAT) offices and 15 sub-offices in U.S. embassies and consulates across the globe. These foreign offices exist primarily for the purpose of coordination with foreign security services and do not usually conduct unilateral operations in the host countries. The FBI can and does at times carry out secret activities overseas, just as the CIA has a limited domestic function. These activities generally require coordination across government agencies.\nThe FBI was established in 1908 as the Bureau of Investigation, the BOI or BI for short. Its name was changed to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 1935. The FBI headquarters is the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington, D.C. The FBI has a list of the top 10 most wanted fugitives.\nMission, priorities and budget.\nMission.\nThe mission of the FBI is to \"protect the American people and uphold the Constitution of the United States\".\nPriorities.\nCurrently, the FBI's top priorities are:\nBudget.\nIn the fiscal year 2019, the Bureau's total budget was approximately $9.6\u00a0billion.\nIn the Authorization and Budget Request to Congress for fiscal year 2021, the FBI asked for $9,800,724,000. Of that money, $9,748,829,000 would be used for Salaries and Expenses (S&amp;E) and $51,895,000 for Construction. The S&amp;E program saw an increase of $199,673,000.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nIn 1896, the National Bureau of Criminal Identification was founded, providing agencies across the country with information to identify known criminals. The 1901 assassination of President William McKinley created a perception that the United States was under threat from anarchists. The Departments of Justice and Labor had been keeping records on anarchists for years, but President Theodore Roosevelt wanted more power to monitor them.\nThe Justice Department had been tasked with the regulation of interstate commerce since 1887, though it lacked the staff to do so. It had made little effort to relieve its staff shortage until the Oregon land fraud scandal at the turn of the 20th century. President Roosevelt instructed Attorney General Charles Bonaparte to organize an autonomous investigative service that would report only to the Attorney General.\nBonaparte contacted other agencies, including the U.S. Secret Service, for personnel, investigators in particular. On May 27, 1908, Congress forbade this use of Treasury employees by the Justice Department, citing fears that the new agency would serve as a secret police department. Again at Roosevelt's urging, Bonaparte moved to organize a formal Bureau of Investigation, which would then have its own staff of special agents.\nCreation of BOI.\nThe Bureau of Investigation (BOI) was created on July 26, 1908. Attorney General Bonaparte, using Department of Justice expense funds, hired thirty-four people, including some veterans of the Secret Service, to work for a new investigative agency. Its first \"chief\" (the title is now \"director\") was Stanley Finch. Bonaparte notified the Congress of these actions in December 1908.\nThe bureau's first official task was visiting and making surveys of the houses of prostitution in preparation for enforcing the \"White Slave Traffic Act\" or Mann Act, passed on June 25, 1910. In 1932, the bureau was renamed the United States Bureau of Investigation.\nCreation of FBI.\nThe following year, 1933, the BOI was linked to the Bureau of Prohibition and rechristened the Division of Investigation (DOI); it became an independent service within the Department of Justice in 1935. In the same year, its name was officially changed from the Division of Investigation to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).\nJ. Edgar Hoover as FBI director.\nJ. Edgar Hoover served as FBI director from 1924 to 1972, a combined 48 years with the BOI, DOI, and FBI. He was chiefly responsible for creating the Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory, or the FBI Laboratory, which officially opened in 1932, as part of his work to professionalize investigations by the government. Hoover was substantially involved in most major cases and projects that the FBI handled during his tenure. But as detailed below, his tenure as Bureau director proved to be highly controversial, especially in its later years. After Hoover's death, Congress passed legislation that limited the tenure of future FBI directors to ten years.\nEarly homicide investigations of the new agency included the Osage Indian murders. During the \"War on Crime\" of the 1930s, FBI agents apprehended or killed a number of notorious criminals who committed kidnappings, bank robberies, and murders throughout the nation, including John Dillinger, \"Baby Face\" Nelson, Kate \"Ma\" Barker, Alvin \"Creepy\" Karpis, and George \"Machine Gun\" Kelly.\nOther activities of its early decades focused on the scope and influence of the white supremacist group Ku Klux Klan, a group with which the FBI was evidenced to be working in the Viola Liuzzo lynching case. Earlier, through the work of Edwin Atherton, the BOI claimed to have successfully apprehended an entire army of Mexican neo-revolutionaries under the leadership of General Enrique Estrada in the mid-1920s, east of San Diego, California.\nHoover began using wiretapping in the 1920s during Prohibition to arrest bootleggers. In the 1927 case \"Olmstead v. United States\", in which a bootlegger was caught through telephone tapping, the United States Supreme Court ruled that FBI wiretaps did not violate the Fourth Amendment as unlawful search and seizure, as long as the FBI did not break into a person's home to complete the tapping. After Prohibition's repeal, Congress passed the Communications Act of 1934, which outlawed non-consensual phone tapping, but did allow bugging. In the 1939 case \"Nardone v. United States\", the court ruled that due to the 1934 law, evidence the FBI obtained by phone tapping was inadmissible in court. After \"Katz v. United States\" (1967) overturned \"Olmstead\", Congress passed the Omnibus Crime Control Act, allowing public authorities to tap telephones during investigations, as long as they obtained warrants beforehand.\nNational security.\nBeginning in the 1940s and continuing into the 1970s, the bureau investigated cases of espionage against the United States and its allies. Eight Nazi agents who had planned sabotage operations against American targets were arrested, and six were executed (\"Ex parte Quirin\") under their sentences. Also during this time, a joint US/UK code-breaking effort called \"The Venona Project\"\u2014with which the FBI was heavily involved\u2014broke Soviet diplomatic and intelligence communications codes, allowing the US and British governments to read Soviet communications. This effort confirmed the existence of Americans working in the United States for Soviet intelligence. Hoover was administering this project, but he failed to notify the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of it until 1952. Another notable case was the arrest of Soviet spy Rudolf Abel in 1957. The discovery of Soviet spies operating in the US motivated Hoover to pursue his longstanding concern with the threat he perceived from the American Left.\nJapanese American internment.\nIn 1939, the Bureau began compiling a custodial detention list with the names of those who would be taken into custody in the event of war with Axis nations. The majority of the names on the list belonged to Issei community leaders, as the FBI investigation built on an existing Naval Intelligence index that had focused on Japanese Americans in Hawaii and the West Coast, but many German and Italian nationals also found their way onto the FBI Index list. Robert Shivers, head of the Honolulu office, obtained permission from Hoover to start detaining those on the list on December 7, 1941, while bombs were still falling over Pearl Harbor. Mass arrests and searches of homes, in most cases conducted without warrants, began a few hours after the attack, and over the next several weeks more than 5,500 Issei men were taken into FBI custody. \nOn February 19, 1942, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, authorizing the removal of Japanese Americans from the West Coast. FBI Director Hoover opposed the subsequent mass removal and confinement of Japanese Americans authorized under Executive Order 9066, but Roosevelt prevailed. The vast majority went along with the subsequent exclusion orders, but in a handful of cases where Japanese Americans refused to obey the new military regulations, FBI agents handled their arrests. The Bureau continued surveillance on Japanese Americans throughout the war, conducting background checks on applicants for resettlement outside camp, and entering the camps, usually without the permission of War Relocation Authority officials, and grooming informants to monitor dissidents and \"troublemakers\". After the war, the FBI was assigned to protect returning Japanese Americans from attacks by hostile white communities.\nSex deviates program.\nAccording to Douglas M. Charles, the FBI's \"sex deviates\" program began on April 10, 1950, when J. Edgar Hoover forwarded to the White House, to the U.S. Civil Service Commission, and to branches of the armed services a list of 393 alleged federal employees who had allegedly been arrested in Washington, D.C., since 1947, on charges of \"sexual irregularities\". On June 20, 1951, Hoover expanded the program by issuing a memo establishing a \"uniform policy for the handling of the increasing number of reports and allegations concerning present and past employees of the United States Government who assertedly [sic] are sex deviates\". The program was expanded to include non-government jobs. According to Athan Theoharis, \"In 1951 he [Hoover] had unilaterally instituted a Sex Deviates program to purge alleged homosexuals from any position in the federal government, from the lowliest clerk to the more powerful position of White house aide.\" On May 27, 1953, Executive Order 10450 went into effect. The program was expanded further by this executive order by making all federal employment of homosexuals illegal. On July 8, 1953, the FBI forwarded to the U.S. Civil Service Commission information from the sex deviates program. Between 1977 and 1978, 300,000 pages in the sex deviates program, collected between 1930 and the mid-1970s, were destroyed by FBI officials.\nCivil rights movement.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, FBI officials became increasingly concerned about the influence of civil rights leaders, whom they believed either had communist ties or were unduly influenced by communists or \"fellow travelers\". In 1956, for example, Hoover sent an open letter denouncing Dr. T. R. M. Howard, a civil rights leader, surgeon, and wealthy entrepreneur in Mississippi who had criticized FBI inaction in solving recent murders of George W. Lee, Emmett Till, and other blacks in the South. The FBI carried out controversial domestic surveillance in an operation it called the COINTELPRO, from \"COunter-INTELligence PROgram\". It was to investigate and disrupt the activities of dissident political organizations within the United States, including both militant and non-violent organizations. Among its targets was the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, a leading civil rights organization whose clergy leadership included the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr..\nThe FBI frequently investigated King. In the mid-1960s, King began to criticize the Bureau for giving insufficient attention to the use of terrorism by white supremacists. Hoover responded by publicly calling King the most \"notorious liar\" in the United States. In his 1991 memoir, \"Washington Post\" journalist Carl Rowan asserted that the FBI had sent at least one anonymous letter to King encouraging him to commit suicide. Historian Taylor Branch documents an anonymous November 1964 \"suicide package\" sent by the Bureau that combined a letter to the civil rights leader telling him \"You are done. There is only one way out for you.\" with audio recordings of King's sexual indiscretions.\nIn March 1971, the residential office of an FBI agent in Media, Pennsylvania, was burgled by a group calling itself the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI. Numerous files were taken and distributed to a range of newspapers, including \"The Harvard Crimson\". The files detailed the FBI's extensive COINTELPRO program, which included investigations into lives of ordinary citizens\u2014including a black student group at a Pennsylvania military college and the daughter of Congressman Henry S. Reuss of Wisconsin. The country was \"jolted\" by the revelations, which included assassinations of political activists, and the actions were denounced by members of the Congress, including House Majority Leader Hale Boggs. The phones of some members of the Congress, including Boggs, had allegedly been tapped.\nKennedy's assassination.\nWhen President John F. Kennedy was shot and killed, the jurisdiction fell to the local police departments until President Lyndon B. Johnson directed the FBI to take over the investigation. To ensure clarity about the responsibility for investigation of homicides of federal officials, Congress passed a law in 1965 that included investigations of such deaths of federal officials, especially by homicide, within FBI jurisdiction.\nOrganized crime.\nIn response to organized crime, on August 25, 1953, the FBI created the Top Hoodlum Program. The national office directed field offices to gather information on mobsters in their territories and to report it regularly to Washington for a centralized collection of intelligence on racketeers. After the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, for RICO Act, took effect, the FBI began investigating the former Prohibition-organized groups, which had become fronts for crime in major cities and small towns. All the FBI work was done undercover and from within these organizations, using the provisions provided in the RICO Act. Gradually the agency dismantled many of the groups. Although Hoover initially denied the existence of a National Crime Syndicate in the United States, the Bureau later conducted operations against known organized crime syndicates and families, including those headed by Sam Giancana and John Gotti. The RICO Act is still used today for all organized crime and any individuals who may fall under the Act's provisions.\nIn 2003, a congressional committee called the FBI's organized crime informant program \"one of the greatest failures in the history of federal law enforcement\". The FBI allowed four innocent men to be convicted of the March 1965 gangland murder of Edward \"Teddy\" Deegan in order to protect Vincent Flemmi, an FBI informant. Three of the men were sentenced to death (which was later reduced to life in prison), and the fourth defendant was sentenced to life in prison. Two of the four men died in prison after serving almost 30 years, and two others were released after serving 32 and 36 years. In July 2007, U.S. District Judge Nancy Gertner in Boston found that the Bureau had helped convict the four men using false witness accounts given by mobster Joseph Barboza. The U.S. Government was ordered to pay $100\u00a0million in damages to the four defendants.\nSpecial FBI teams.\nIn 1982, the FBI formed an elite unit to help with problems that might arise at the 1984 Summer Olympics to be held in Los Angeles, particularly terrorism and major-crime. This was a result of the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany, when terrorists murdered the Israeli athletes. Named the Hostage Rescue Team, or HRT, it acts as a dedicated FBI SWAT team dealing primarily with counter-terrorism scenarios. Unlike the special agents serving on local FBI SWAT teams, HRT does not conduct investigations. Instead, HRT focuses solely on additional tactical proficiency and capabilities. Also formed in 1984 was the \"Computer Analysis and Response Team\", or CART.\nFrom the end of the 1980s to the early 1990s, the FBI reassigned more than 300 agents from foreign counter-intelligence duties to violent crime, and made violent crime the sixth national priority. With cuts to other well-established departments, and because terrorism was no longer considered a threat after the end of the Cold War, the FBI assisted local and state police forces in tracking fugitives who had crossed state lines, which is a federal offense. The FBI Laboratory helped develop DNA testing, continuing its pioneering role in identification that began with its fingerprinting system in 1924.\nNotable efforts in the 1990s.\nOn May 1, 1992, FBI SWAT and HRT personnel in Los Angeles County, California aided local officials in securing peace within the area during the 1992 Los Angeles riots. HRT operators, for instance, spent 10 days conducting vehicle-mounted patrols throughout Los Angeles, before returning to Virginia.\nBetween 1993 and 1996, the FBI increased its counter-terrorism role following the first 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City, the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and the arrest of the Unabomber in 1996. Technological innovation and the skills of FBI Laboratory analysts helped ensure that the three cases were successfully prosecuted. However, Justice Department investigations into the FBI's roles in the Ruby Ridge and Waco incidents were found to have been obstructed by agents within the Bureau. During the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, the FBI was criticized for its investigation of the Centennial Olympic Park bombing. It has settled a dispute with Richard Jewell, who was a private security guard at the venue, along with some media organizations, in regard to the leaking of his name during the investigation; this had briefly led to his being wrongly suspected of the bombing.\nAfter Congress passed the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA, 1994), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, 1996), and the Economic Espionage Act (EEA, 1996), the FBI followed suit and underwent a technological upgrade in 1998, just as it did with its CART team in 1991. Computer Investigations and Infrastructure Threat Assessment Center (CITAC) and the National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC) were created to deal with the increase in Internet-related problems, such as computer viruses, worms, and other malicious programs that threatened U.S. operations. With these developments, the FBI increased its electronic surveillance in public safety and national security investigations, adapting to the telecommunications advancements that changed the nature of such problems.\nSeptember 11 attacks.\nDuring the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, FBI agent Leonard W. Hatton Jr. was killed during the rescue effort while helping the rescue personnel evacuate the occupants of the South Tower, and he stayed when it collapsed. Within months after the attacks, FBI Director Robert Mueller, who had been sworn in a week before the attacks, called for a re-engineering of FBI structure and operations. He made countering every federal crime a top priority, including the prevention of terrorism, countering foreign intelligence operations, addressing cybersecurity threats, other high-tech crimes, protecting civil rights, combating public corruption, organized crime, white-collar crime, and major acts of violent crime.\nIn February 2001, Robert Hanssen was caught selling information to the Russian government. It was later learned that Hanssen, who had reached a high position within the FBI, had been selling intelligence since as early as 1979. He pleaded guilty to espionage and received a life sentence in 2002, but the incident led many to question the security practices employed by the FBI. There was also a claim that Hanssen might have contributed information that led to the September 11, 2001, attacks.\nThe 9/11 Commission's final report on July 22, 2004, stated that the FBI and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) were both partially to blame for not pursuing intelligence reports that could have prevented the September 11 attacks. In its most damning assessment, the report concluded that the country had \"not been well served\" by either agency and listed numerous recommendations for changes within the FBI. While the FBI did accede to most of the recommendations, including oversight by the new director of National Intelligence, some former members of the 9/11 Commission publicly criticized the FBI in October 2005, claiming it was resisting any meaningful changes.\nOn July 8, 2007, \"The Washington Post\" published excerpts from UCLA Professor Amy Zegart's book \"Spying Blind: The CIA, the FBI, and the Origins of 9/11\". The \"Post\" reported, from Zegart's book, that government documents showed that both the CIA and the FBI had missed 23 potential chances to disrupt the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. The primary reasons for the failures included: agency cultures resistant to change and new ideas; inappropriate incentives for promotion; and a lack of cooperation between the FBI, CIA, and the rest of the United States Intelligence Community. The book blamed the FBI's decentralized structure, which prevented effective communication and cooperation among different FBI offices. The book suggested that the FBI had not evolved into an effective counter-terrorism or counter-intelligence agency, due in large part to deeply ingrained agency cultural resistance to change. For example, FBI personnel practices continued to treat all staff other than special agents as support staff, classifying intelligence analysts alongside the FBI's auto mechanics and janitors.\nFaulty bullet analysis.\nFor over 40 years, the FBI crime lab in Quantico had believed that lead alloys used in bullets had unique chemical signatures. It was analyzing the bullets with the goal of matching them chemically, not only to a single batch of ammunition coming out of a factory, but also to a single box of bullets. The National Academy of Sciences conducted an 18-month independent review of comparative bullet-lead analysis. In 2003, its National Research Council published a report whose conclusions called into question 30 years of FBI testimony. It found the analytic model used by the FBI for interpreting results was deeply flawed, and the conclusion, that bullet fragments could be matched to a box of ammunition, was so overstated that it was misleading under the rules of evidence. One year later, the FBI decided to stop conducting bullet lead analyses.\nAfter a \"60 Minutes\"/\"The Washington Post\" investigation in November 2007, two years later, the Bureau agreed to identify, review, and release all pertinent cases, and notify prosecutors about cases in which faulty testimony was given.\nTechnology.\nIn 2012, the FBI formed the National Domestic Communications Assistance Center to develop technology for assisting law enforcement with technical knowledge regarding communication services, technologies, and electronic surveillance.\nJanuary 6 United States Capitol attack.\nAn FBI informant who participated in the January 6 United States Capitol attack on democratic institutions in Washington D.C. later testified in support of the Proud boys, who were part of the plot. Revelations about the informant raised fresh questions about intelligence failures by the FBI before the riot. According to the Brennan Center, and Senate committees, the FBI's response to white supremacist violence was \"woefully inadequate\". The FBI has long been suspected to have turned a blind eye towards right-wing extremists while disseminating \"conspiracy theories\" on the origin of SARS-CoV-2.\nOrganization.\nOrganizational structure.\nThe FBI is organized into functional branches and the Office of the Director, which contains most administrative offices. An executive assistant director manages each branch. Each branch is then divided into offices and divisions, each headed by an assistant director. The various divisions are further divided into sub-branches, led by deputy assistant directors. Within these sub-branches, there are various sections headed by section chiefs. Section chiefs are ranked analogous to special agents in charge. Four of the branches report to the deputy director while two report to the associate director.\nThe main branches of the FBI are:\nEach branch focuses on different tasks, and some focus on more than one. Here are some of the tasks that different branches are in charge of:\nFBI Headquarters Washington D.C..\nNational Security Branch (NSB)\nIntelligence Branch (IB)\nFBI Criminal, Cyber, Response, and Services Branch (CCRSB)\nScience and Technology Branch (STB)\nOther Headquarter Offices.\nInformation and Technology Branch (ITB)\nHuman Resources Branch (HRB)\nAdministrative and financial management support\nOffice of the Director.\nThe Office of the Director serves as the central administrative organ of the FBI. The office provides staff support functions (such as finance and facilities management) to the five function branches and the various field divisions. The office is managed by the FBI associate director, who also oversees the operations of both the Information and Technology and Human Resources Branches.\nSenior staff\nOffice of the Director\nRank structure.\nThe following is a listing of the rank structure found within the FBI (in ascending order):\nLegal authority.\nThe FBI's mandate is established in Title 28 of the United States Code (U.S. Code), Section 533, which authorizes the Attorney General to \"appoint officials to detect and prosecute crimes against the United States\". Other federal statutes give the FBI the authority and responsibility to investigate specific crimes.\nThe FBI's chief tool against organized crime is the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act. The FBI is also charged with the responsibility of enforcing compliance of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964 and investigating violations of the act in addition to prosecuting such violations with the United States Department of Justice (DOJ). The FBI also shares concurrent jurisdiction with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in the enforcement of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.\nThe USA PATRIOT Act increased the powers allotted to the FBI, especially in wiretapping and monitoring of Internet activity. One of the most controversial provisions of the act is the so-called \"sneak and peek\" provision, granting the FBI powers to search a house while the residents are away, and not requiring them to notify the residents for several weeks afterward. Under the PATRIOT Act's provisions, the FBI also resumed inquiring into the library records of those who are suspected of terrorism (something it had supposedly not done since the 1970s).\nIn the early 1980s, Senate hearings were held to examine FBI undercover operations in the wake of the Abscam controversy, which had allegations of entrapment of elected officials. As a result, in the following years a number of guidelines were issued to constrain FBI activities.\nInformation obtained through an FBI investigation is presented to the appropriate U.S. Attorney or Department of Justice official, who decides if prosecution or other action is warranted.\nThe FBI often works in conjunction with other federal agencies, including the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in seaport and airport security, and the National Transportation Safety Board in investigating airplane crashes and other critical incidents. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) has nearly the same amount of investigative manpower as the FBI and investigates the largest range of crimes. In the wake of the September 11 attacks, then\u2013Attorney General Ashcroft assigned the FBI as the designated lead organization in terrorism investigations after the creation of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. HSI and the FBI are both integral members of the Joint Terrorism Task Force.\nIndian reservations.\nThe federal government has the primary responsibility for investigating and prosecuting serious crime on Indian reservations.\nThe FBI does not specifically list crimes in Native American land as one of its priorities. Often serious crimes have been either poorly investigated or prosecution has been declined. Tribal courts can impose sentences of up to three years, under certain restrictions.\nInfrastructure.\nThe FBI is headquartered at the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington, D.C., with 56 field offices in major cities across the United States. The FBI also maintains over 400 resident agencies across the United States, as well as over 50 legal attach\u00e9s at United States embassies and consulates. Many specialized FBI functions are located at facilities in Quantico, Virginia, as well as a \"data campus\" in Clarksburg, West Virginia, where 96\u00a0million sets of fingerprints \"from across the United States are stored, along with others collected by American authorities from prisoners in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, Iraq and Afghanistan\". The FBI is in process of moving its Records Management Division, which processes Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, to Winchester, Virginia.\nAccording to \"The Washington Post\", the FBI \"is building a vast repository controlled by people who work in a top-secret vault on the fourth floor of the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington. This one stores the profiles of tens of thousands of Americans and legal residents who are not accused of any crime. What they have done is appear to be acting suspiciously to a town sheriff, a traffic cop or even a neighbor.\"\nThe FBI Laboratory, established with the formation of the BOI, did not appear in the J. Edgar Hoover Building until its completion in 1974. The lab serves as the primary lab for most DNA, biological, and physical work. Public tours of FBI headquarters ran through the FBI laboratory workspace before the move to the J. Edgar Hoover Building. The services the lab conducts include \"Chemistry\", \"Combined DNA Index System\" (CODIS), \"Computer Analysis and Response\", \"DNA Analysis\", \"Evidence Response\", \"Explosives\", \"Firearms and Tool marks\", \"Forensic Audio\", \"Forensic Video\", \"Image Analysis\", \"Forensic Science Research\", \"Forensic Science Training\", \"Hazardous Materials Response\", \"Investigative and Prospective Graphics\", \"Latent Prints\", \"Materials Analysis\", \"Questioned Documents\", \"Racketeering Records\", \"Special Photographic Analysis\", \"Structural Design\", and \"Trace Evidence\". The services of the FBI Laboratory are used by many state, local, and international agencies free of charge. The lab also maintains a second lab at the FBI Academy.\nThe FBI Academy, located in Quantico, Virginia, is home to the communications and computer laboratory the FBI utilizes. It is also where new agents are sent for training to become FBI special agents. Going through the 21-week course is required for every special agent. First opened for use in 1972, the facility is located on of woodland. The Academy trains state and local law enforcement agencies, which are invited to the law enforcement training center. The FBI units that reside at Quantico are the \"Field and Police Training Unit\", \"Firearms Training Unit\", \"Forensic Science Research and Training Center\", \"Technology Services Unit\" (TSU), \"Investigative Training Unit\", \"Law Enforcement Communication Unit\", \"Leadership and Management Science Units\" (LSMU), \"Physical Training Unit\", \"New Agents' Training Unit\" (NATU), \"Practical Applications Unit\" (PAU), the \"Investigative Computer Training Unit\" and the \"College of Analytical Studies\".\nIn 2000, the FBI began the Trilogy project to upgrade its outdated information technology (IT) infrastructure. This project, originally scheduled to take three years and cost around $380\u00a0million, ended up over budget and behind schedule. Efforts to deploy modern computers and networking equipment were generally successful, but attempts to develop new investigation software, outsourced to Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), were not. Virtual Case File, or VCF, as the software was known, was plagued by poorly defined goals, and repeated changes in management. \nIn January 2005, more than two years after the software was originally planned for completion, the FBI abandoned the project. At least $100\u00a0million, and much more by some estimates, was spent on the project, which never became operational. The FBI has been forced to continue using its decade-old Automated Case Support system, which IT experts consider woefully inadequate. In March 2005, the FBI announced it was beginning a new, more ambitious software project, code-named Sentinel, which they expected to complete by 2009.\nCarnivore was an electronic eavesdropping software system implemented by the FBI during the Clinton administration; it was designed to monitor email and electronic communications. After prolonged negative coverage in the press, the FBI changed the name of its system from \"Carnivore\" to \"DCS1000\". DCS is reported to stand for \"Digital Collection System\"; the system has the same functions as before. The Associated Press reported in mid-January 2005 that the FBI essentially abandoned the use of Carnivore in 2001, in favor of commercially available software, such as NarusInsight.\nThe Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division is located in Clarksburg, West Virginia. Organized beginning in 1991, the office opened in 1995 as the youngest agency division. The complex is the length of three football fields. It provides a main repository for information in various data systems. Under the roof of the CJIS are the programs for the \"National Crime Information Center\" (NCIC), \"Uniform Crime Reporting\" (UCR), \"Fingerprint Identification\", \"Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System\" (IAFIS), \"NCIC 2000\", and the \"National Incident-Based Reporting System\" (NIBRS). Many state and local agencies use these data systems as a source for their own investigations and contribute to the database using secure communications. FBI provides these tools of sophisticated identification and information services to local, state, federal, and international law enforcement agencies.\nThe FBI heads the National Virtual Translation Center, which provides \"timely and accurate translations of foreign intelligence for all elements of the Intelligence Community\".\nIn June 2021, the FBI held a groundbreaking for its planned FBI Innovation Center, set to be built in Huntsville, Alabama. The Innovation Center is to be part of a large, college-like campus costing a total of $1.3 billion in Redstone Arsenal and will act as a center for cyber threat intelligence, data analytics, and emerging threat training.\nPersonnel.\n, the FBI had a total of 33,852 employees. That includes 13,412 special agents and 20,420 support professionals, such as intelligence analysts, language specialists, scientists, information technology specialists, and other professionals.\nLine of Duty Deaths.\nAccording to the Officer Down Memorial Page 87 FBI agents and 2 K9s have died in the line of duty from 1925 to February 2021.\nHiring process.\nTo apply to become an FBI agent, one must be between the ages of 23 and 37, unless one is a preference-eligible veteran, in which case one may apply after age 37. The applicant must also hold U.S. citizenship, be of high moral character, have a clean record, and hold at least a four-year bachelor's degree. At least three years of professional work experience prior to application is also required. All FBI employees require a Top Secret (TS) security clearance, and in many instances, employees need a TS/SCI (Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information) clearance. \nTo obtain a security clearance, all potential FBI personnel must pass a series of Single Scope Background Investigations (SSBI), which are conducted by the Office of Personnel Management. Special agent candidates also have to pass a Physical Fitness Test (PFT), which includes a 300-meter run, one-minute sit-ups, maximum push-ups, and a run. Personnel must pass a polygraph test with questions including possible drug use. Applicants who fail polygraphs may not gain employment with the FBI. Up until 1975, the FBI had a minimum height requirement of .\nBOI and FBI directors.\nFBI directors are appointed (nominated) by the president of the United States and must be confirmed by the United States Senate to serve a term of office of ten years, subject to resignation or removal by the president at his/her discretion before their term ends. Additional terms are allowed following the same procedure.\nJ. Edgar Hoover, appointed by President Calvin Coolidge in 1924, was by far the longest-serving director, serving until his death in 1972. In 1968, Congress passed legislation, as part of the \"Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968\", requiring Senate confirmation of appointments of future directors. As the incumbent, this legislation did not apply to Hoover. The last FBI director was Andrew McCabe. The current FBI director is Kash Patel, appointed by President Donald Trump.\nThe FBI director is responsible for the day-to-day operations at the FBI. Along with the deputy director, the director makes sure cases and operations are handled correctly. The director also is in charge of making sure the leadership in the FBI field offices is staffed with qualified agents. Before the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act was passed in the wake of the September 11 attacks, the FBI director would directly brief the president of the United States on any issues that arise from within the FBI. Since then, the director now reports to the director of national intelligence (DNI), who in turn reports to the President.\nFirearms.\nUpon qualification, an FBI special agent is issued a full-size Glock 22 or compact Glock 23 semi-automatic pistol, both of which are chambered in the .40 S&amp;W cartridge. In May 1997, the FBI officially adopted the Glock, in .40 S&amp;W, for general agent use, and first issued it to New Agent Class 98-1 in October 1997. At present, the Glock 23 \"FG&amp;R\" (finger groove and rail; either 3rd generation or \"Gen4\") is the issue sidearm. \nNew agents are issued firearms, on which they must qualify, on successful completion of their training at the FBI Academy. The Glock 26 (subcompact 9\u00a0mm Parabellum), Glock 23 and Glock 27 (.40 S&amp;W compact and subcompact, respectively) are authorized as secondary weapons. Special agents are also authorized to purchase and qualify with the Glock 21 in .45 ACP.\nSpecial agents of the FBI Hostage Rescue Team (HRT) and regional SWAT teams are issued the Springfield Armory Professional Model 1911 pistol in .45 ACP.\nIn June 2016, the FBI awarded Glock a contract for new handguns. Unlike the currently issued .40 S&amp;W chambered Glock pistols, the new Glocks will be chambered for 9\u00a0mm Parabellum. The contract is for the full-size Glock 17M and the compact Glock 19M. The \"M\" means the Glocks have been modified to meet government standards specified by a 2015 government request for proposal.\nPublications.\nThe \"FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin\" is published monthly by the FBI Law Enforcement Communication Unit, with articles of interest to state and local law enforcement personnel. First published in 1932 as \"Fugitives Wanted by Police\", the \"FBI Law Bulletin\" covers topics including law enforcement technology and issues, such as crime mapping and use of force, as well as recent criminal justice research, and ViCAP alerts, on wanted suspects and key cases.\nThe FBI also publishes some reports for both law enforcement personnel as well as regular citizens covering topics including law enforcement, terrorism, cybercrime, white-collar crime, violent crime, and statistics. The vast majority of federal government publications covering these topics are published by the Office of Justice Programs agencies of the United States Department of Justice, and disseminated through the National Criminal Justice Reference Service.\nCrime statistics.\nDuring the 1920s the FBI began issuing crime reports by gathering numbers from local police departments. Due to limitations of this system that were discovered during the 1960s and 1970s\u2014victims often simply did not report crimes to the police in the first place\u2014the Department of Justice developed an alternative method of tallying crime, the victimization survey.\nUniform Crime Reports.\nThe Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) compile data from over 17,000 law enforcement agencies across the country. They provide detailed data regarding the volume of crimes to include arrest, clearance (or closing a case), and law enforcement officer information. The UCR focuses its data collection on violent crimes, hate crimes, and property crimes. Created in the 1920s, the UCR system has not proven to be as \"uniform\" as its name implies. The UCR data only reflect the most serious offense in the case of connected crimes and has a very restrictive definition of rape. Since about 93% of the data submitted to the FBI is in this format, the UCR stands out as the publication of choice as most states require law enforcement agencies to submit this data.\nPreliminary Annual \"Uniform Crime Report\" for 2006 was released on June 4, 2006. The report shows violent crime offenses rose 1.3%, but the number of property crime offenses decreased 2.9% compared to 2005.\nNational Incident-Based Reporting System.\nThe National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) crime statistics system aims to address limitations inherent in UCR data. The system is used by law enforcement agencies in the United States for collecting and reporting data on crimes. Local, state, and federal agencies generate NIBRS data from their records management systems. Data is collected on every incident and arrest in the Group A offense category. The Group A offenses are 46 specific crimes grouped in 22 offense categories. Specific facts about these offenses are gathered and reported in the NIBRS system. In addition to the Group A offenses, eleven Group B offenses are reported with only the arrest information. The NIBRS system is in greater detail than the summary-based UCR system. , 5,271 law enforcement agencies submitted NIBRS data. That amount represents 20% of the United States population and 16% of the crime statistics data collected by the FBI.\neGuardian.\neGuardian is the name of an FBI system, launched in January 2009, to share tips about possible terror threats with local police agencies. The program aims to get law enforcement at all levels sharing data quickly about suspicious activity and people.\neGuardian enables near real-time sharing and tracking of terror information and suspicious activities with local, state, tribal, and federal agencies. The eGuardian system is a spin-off of a similar but classified tool called Guardian that has been used inside the FBI, and shared with vetted partners since 2005.\nControversies.\nThroughout its history, the FBI has been the subject of many controversies, both at home and abroad.\nSpecific practices include:\nMedia portrayal.\nThe FBI has been frequently depicted in popular media since the 1930s. The bureau has participated to varying degrees, which has ranged from direct involvement in the creative process of film or TV series development, to providing consultation on operations and closed cases. A few of the notable portrayals of the FBI on television are the series \"The X-Files\", which started in 1993 and concluded its eleventh season in early 2018, and concerned investigations into paranormal phenomena by five fictional special agents, and the fictional Counter Terrorist Unit (CTU) agency in the TV drama \"24\", which is patterned after the FBI Counterterrorism Division. \nThe 1991 movie \"Point Break\" depicts an undercover FBI agent who infiltrated a gang of bank robbers. The 1997 movie \"Donnie Brasco\" is based on the true story of undercover FBI agent Joseph D. Pistone infiltrating the Mafia. The 2005\u20132020 television series \"Criminal Minds\", that follows the team members of the FBI's Behavioral Analysis Unit (BAU) in the pursuit of serial killers. The 2017 TV series Riverdale where one of the main characters is an FBI agent. The 2015 TV series \"Quantico\", titled after the location of the Bureau's training facility, deals with probationary and special agents, not all of whom, within the show's format, may be fully reliable or even trustworthy. \nThe 2018 series \"FBI\", set in NYC that follows the personal and professional lives of the agents assigned to 26 Federal Plaza (NYC FBI field office). \"FBI\" first spin-off titled ' (2019), follows the FBI's Fugitive Task Force in chasing down the US's most wanted criminals, and the second spin-off, ' (2021), follows the FBI's International Fly Team that goes where ever they are needed in the world to protect the US's interests."}
{"id": "11129", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11129", "title": "Flamsteed designation", "text": "A Flamsteed designation is a combination of a number and constellation name that uniquely identifies most naked eye stars in the modern constellations visible from southern England. They are named for John Flamsteed who first used them while compiling his \"Historia Coelestis Britannica\". (Flamsteed used a telescope, and the catalog also includes some stars which are relatively bright but not necessarily visible with the naked eye.)\nDescription.\nFlamsteed designations for stars are similar to Bayer designations, except that they use numbers instead of Greek and Roman letters. Each star is assigned a number and the Latin genitive of the constellation it lies in (see 88 modern constellations for a list of constellations and the genitive forms of their names). Flamsteed designations were assigned to 2554 stars. The numbers were originally assigned in order of increasing right ascension within each constellation, but due to the effects of precession they are now slightly out of order in some places.\nThis method of designating stars first appeared in a preliminary version of John Flamsteed's \"Historia Coelestis Britannica\" published by Edmond Halley and Isaac Newton in 1712 without Flamsteed's approval. The final version of Flamsteed's catalogue published in 1725 after his death omitted the numerical designations altogether. The numbers now in use were assigned by the French astronomer, Joseph J\u00e9r\u00f4me de Lalande and appeared in his 1783 almanac, \"\u00c9ph\u00e9m\u00e9rides des mouvemens c\u00e9lestes\" which contained a revised edition of Flamsteed's catalogue. Lalande noted in his Introduction that he got the idea from the unofficial 1712 edition.\nFlamsteed designations gained popularity throughout the eighteenth century, and are now commonly used when no Bayer designation exists. Where a Bayer designation with a Greek letter does exist for a star, it is usually used in preference to the Flamsteed designation. (Flamsteed numbers are generally preferred to Bayer designations with \"Roman\" letters.) Examples of well-known stars that are usually referred to by their Flamsteed numbers include 51 Pegasi, and 61 Cygni. Flamsteed designations are often used instead of the Bayer designation if the latter contains an extra attached number; for example, \"55 Cancri\" is more common than \"Rho1 Cancri\".\nThere are examples of stars, such as 10 Ursae Majoris in Lynx, bearing Flamsteed designations for constellations in which they do not lie, just as there are for Bayer designations, because of the compromises that had to be made when the modern constellation boundaries were drawn up.\nFlamsteed's catalogue covered only the stars visible from Great Britain, and therefore stars of the far southern constellations have no Flamsteed numbers. Some stars, such as the nearby star 82 Eridani, were named in a major southern-hemisphere catalog called \"Uranometria Argentina\", by Benjamin Gould; these are Gould numbers, rather than Flamsteed numbers, and should be differentiated with a G, as in 82 G. Eridani. Except for a handful of cases, Gould numbers are not in common use. Similarly, Flamsteed-like designations assigned by other astronomers (for example, Hevelius) are no longer in general use. (A well-known exception is the globular cluster 47 Tucanae from Bode's catalog.)\n84 stars entered in Flamsteed's catalog are errors and proved not to exist in the sky: All of them except 11 Vulpeculae were plotted on his star charts.\nList of constellations using Flamsteed star designations.\nThere are 52 constellations that primarily use Flamsteed designations. Stars are listed in the appropriate lists for the constellation, as follows:\nIn addition, several stars in Puppis, and a small number of stars in Centaurus and Lupus, have been given Flamsteed designations."}
{"id": "11141", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11141", "title": "February 26", "text": ""}
{"id": "11142", "revid": "43029033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11142", "title": "Northrop F-5", "text": "The Northrop F-5 is a family of supersonic light fighter aircraft initially designed as a privately funded project in the late 1950s by Northrop Corporation. There are two main models: the original F-5A and F-5B Freedom Fighter variants, and the extensively updated F-5E and F-5F Tiger\u00a0II variants. The design team wrapped a small, highly aerodynamic fighter around two compact and high-thrust General Electric J85 engines, focusing on performance and a low cost of maintenance. Smaller and simpler than contemporaries such as the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom\u00a0II, the F-5 costs less to procure and operate, making it a popular export aircraft. Though primarily designed for a day air superiority role, the aircraft is also a capable ground-attack platform. The F-5A entered service in the early 1960s. During the Cold War, over 800 were produced through 1972 for US allies. Despite the United States Air Force (USAF) not needing a light fighter at the time, it did procure approximately 1,200 Northrop T-38 Talon trainer aircraft, which were based on Northrop's N-156 fighter design.\nAfter winning the International Fighter Aircraft Competition, a program aimed at providing effective low-cost fighters to American allies, in 1972 Northrop introduced the second-generation F-5E Tiger\u00a0II. This upgrade included more powerful engines, larger fuel capacity, greater wing area and improved leading-edge extensions for better turn rates, optional air-to-air refueling, and improved avionics, including air-to-air radar. Primarily used by American allies, it remains in US service to support training exercises. It has served in a wide array of roles, being able to perform both air and ground attack duties; the type was used extensively in the Vietnam War. A total of 1,400 Tiger\u00a0IIs were built before production ended in 1987. More than 3,800 F-5s and the closely related T-38 advanced trainer aircraft were produced in Hawthorne, California. The F-5N/F variants are in service with the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps as adversary trainers. Over 400 aircraft were in service as of 2021.\nThe F-5 was also developed into a dedicated reconnaissance aircraft, the RF-5 Tigereye. The F-5 also served as a starting point for a series of design studies which resulted in the Northrop YF-17 and the F/A-18 naval fighter aircraft. The Northrop F-20 Tigershark was an advanced variant to succeed the F-5E which was ultimately canceled when export customers did not emerge.\nDesign and development.\nOrigins.\nThe design effort was led by Northrop vice president of engineering and aircraft designer Edgar Schmued, who previously at North American Aviation had been the chief designer of the successful North American P-51 Mustang and F-86 Sabre fighters. Schmued recruited a strong engineering team to Northrop.\nIn December 1953, NATO issued NBMR-1, calling for a lightweight tactical fighter capable of carrying conventional and nuclear weapons and operating from rough airfields. In late 1954, a Northrop team toured Europe and Asia to examine both the NBMR-1 and the needs of SEATO members. From this tour, Schmued gave his team the goal of reversing the trend in fighter development towards greater size and weight in order to deliver an aircraft with high performance, enhanced maneuverability, and high reliability, while still delivering a cost advantage over contemporary fighters. Recognizing that expensive jet aircraft could not viably be replaced every few years, he also demanded \"engineered growth potential\" allowing service longevity in excess of 10 years.\nThe design began to firm up in 1955 with the introduction of the General Electric J85 turbojet engine. Originally developed for McDonnell's ADM-20 Quail decoy for use on the Boeing B-52 Stratofortress, the J85 had a thrust-to-weight ratio of 6.25 to 7.5 depending on the version, giving it a notable advantage over contemporaries such as the 4.7 ratio of the J79 engine used in the F-4 Phantom.\nDesign evolution.\nUsing a pair of J85s as the baseline, the team began considering a series of prospective designs. Among the earliest concepts was the N-156TX of March 1955. This mounted the engines in pods, one under each wing about mid-span. The fuselage was quite slim compared to the final design, with a crew of two under a narrow cockpit canopy.\nThat year, the US Navy expressed an interest in a fighter to operate from its escort carriers, which were too small to operate the Navy's existing jet fighters. Northrop responded with a radical redesign, PD-2706, which placed the engines against the fuselage in short ducts exiting in front of the tail area, like the F-4, and moved the elevator up to form a T-tail. The resulting design had a much shorter fuselage and was quite compact. Development along these lines ended when the Navy decided to withdraw the escort carriers. Northrop continued development of the N-156, both as a two-seat advanced trainer, designated as N-156T, and a single-seat fighter, designated as N-156F.\nAnother highly influential figure was chief engineer Welko Gasich, who convinced Schmued that the engines must be located within the fuselage for maximum performance. This led to the January 1956 PD-2812 version which began to look a lot like the final product, although this version had a long-span low-mounted elevator with notable anhedral. March 1956's PD-2832 moved to a more conventional elevator and had a strongly swept vertical stabilizer. The design underwent several further versions over the next year which experimented with different nose designs and continued to lengthen the fuselage. The final design, PD-2879D, emerged in December 1956.\nGasich also introduced the concept of \"life cycle cost\" into fighter design, which provided the foundation for the F-5's low operating cost and long service life. A Northrop design study stated \"The application of advanced technology was used to provide maximum force effectiveness at minimum cost. This became the Northrop philosophy in the development of the T-38 and F-5 lightweight trainer and fighter aircraft.\"\nInto production.\nThe N-156T was quickly selected by the United States Air Force as a replacement for the T-33 in July 1956. On 12 June 1959, the first prototype aircraft, which was subsequently designated as YT-38 Talon, performed its first flight. By the time production had ended in January 1972, a total of 1,189 Talons had been produced. Development of the N-156F continued at a lower priority as a private venture by Northrop; on 25 February 1958, an order for three prototypes was issued for a prospective low-cost fighter that could be supplied under the Military Assistance Program for distribution to less-developed nations. The first N-156F flew at Edwards Air Force Base on 30 July 1959, exceeding the speed of sound on its first flight.\nAlthough testing of the N-156F was successful, demonstrating unprecedented reliability and proving superior in the ground-attack role to the USAF's existing North American F-100 Super Sabres, official interest in the Northrop type waned, and by 1960 it looked as if the program was a failure. Interest revived in 1961 when the United States Army tested it, (along with the Douglas A-4 Skyhawk and Fiat G.91) for reconnaissance and close-support. Although all three types proved capable during army testing, operating fixed-wing combat aircraft was legally the responsibility of the Air Force, which would not agree to allow the Army to operate fixed-wing combat aircraft, a situation repeated with the C-7 Caribou.\nIn 1962, the Kennedy Administration revived the requirement for a low-cost export fighter, selecting the N-156F as winner of the F-X competition on 23 April 1962, subsequently becoming the \"F-5A\", and was ordered into production in October that year. It was named under the 1962 United States Tri-Service aircraft designation system, which included a re-set of the fighter number series. Northrop manufactured a total of 624 F-5As, including three YF-5A prototypes, before production ended in 1972. A further 200 F-5B two-seat trainer aircraft, lacking nose-mounted cannons but otherwise combat-capable, and 86 RF-5A reconnaissance aircraft, fitted with four-camera noses, were also built. In addition, Canadair built 240 first generation F-5s under license, CASA in Spain built 70 more aircraft.\nThe Royal Norwegian Air Force placed the first international order on 28 February 1964.\nF-5E and F-5F Tiger II.\nIn 1970, Northrop won the International Fighter Aircraft (IFA) competition to replace the F-5A, with better air-to-air performance against aircraft like the Soviet MiG-21. The resulting aircraft, initially known as F-5A-21, subsequently became the F-5E. It had two more powerful GE J85-21 engines, each with dry thrust and in afterburner, and had a lengthened and enlarged fuselage to accommodate more fuel. Its wings were fitted with enlarged leading edge extensions, giving an increased wing area and improved maneuverability. The aircraft's avionics were more sophisticated, crucially including a radar (initially the Emerson Electric AN/APQ-153) (F-5A and B had no radar). It retained the gun armament of two M39 cannons, one on either side of the nose of the F-5A. Various specific avionics fits could be accommodated at a customer's request, including an inertial navigation system, TACAN and ECM equipment. Additionally the two position nose landing gear from the Canadian CF-5 was incorporated to reduce takeoff distance.\nThe first F-5E flew on 11 August 1972. A two-seat combat-capable trainer, the F-5F, was offered, first flying on 25 September 1974, at Edwards Air Force Base, with a new nose, that was three feet longer, which, unlike the F-5B that did not mount a gun, allowed it to retain a single M39 cannon, albeit with a reduced ammunition capacity. The two-seater was equipped with the Emerson AN/APQ-157 radar, which is a derivative of the AN/APQ-153 radar, with dual control and display systems to accommodate the two-men crew, and the radar has the same range of AN/APQ-153, around 10 nmi. On 6 April 1973, the 425th TFS at Williams Air Force Base, Arizona, received the first F-5E Tiger II.\nA reconnaissance version, the RF-5E Tigereye, with a sensor package in the nose displacing the radar and one cannon, was also offered.\nThe F-5E eventually received the official name Tiger II; 792 F-5Es, 146 F-5Fs and 12 RF-5Es were eventually built by Northrop. More were built under license overseas: 91 F-5Es and F-5Fs in Switzerland, 68 by Korean Air in South Korea, and 308 in Taiwan.\nThe F-5E proved to be a successful combat aircraft in service with US allies, but had no combat service with the US Air Force, though the F-5A with modifications, designated F-5C, was flown by the US in Vietnam. The F-5E evolved into the single-engine F-5G, which was rebranded the F-20 Tigershark. It lost out on export sales to the F-16 Fighting Falcon in the 1980s.\nUpgrades.\nThe F-5E experienced numerous upgrades in its service life, with the most significant one being adopting a new planar array radar, Emerson AN/APQ-159 with a range of 20\u00a0nmi to replace the original AN/APQ-153. Similar radar upgrades were also proposed for F-5F, with the derivative of AN/APQ-159, the AN/APQ-167, to replace the AN/APQ-157, but that was cancelled. The latest radar upgrade included the Emerson AN/APG-69, which was the successor of AN/APQ-159, incorporating mapping capability. However, most nations chose not to upgrade for financial reasons, and the radar saw very little service in USAF aggressor squadrons and Swiss Air Force.\nVarious F-5 versions remain in service with many nations. Having taken delivery of its first F-5 Tigers in 1979, Singapore operated approximately 49 modernized and re-designated F-5S (single-seat) and F-5T (two-seat) aircraft until the early 2010s when they were retired from service. Upgrades included new FIAR Grifo-F X-band radar from Galileo Avionica (similar in performance to the AN/APG-69), updated cockpits with multi-function displays, and compatibility with the AIM-120 AMRAAM and Rafael Python air-to-air missiles.\nOne National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) F-5E was given a modified fuselage shape for its employment in the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration program carried out by Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). It is preserved in the Valiant Air Command Warbird Museum at Titusville, Florida.\nThe Royal Thai Air Force (RTAF) had their F-5s undergo an extensive upgrade program, resulting in the aircraft re-designated as F-5T Tigris. They are armed with Python III and IV missiles; and equipped with the Dash helmet-mounted cueing system.\nSimilar programs have been carried out in Chile and Brazil with the help of Elbit. The Chilean upgrade, called the F-5 Tiger III Plus, incorporated a new Elta EL/M-2032 radar and other improvements. The Brazilian program, re-designated as F-5M, adds a new Grifo-F radar along with several avionics and cockpit refurbishments, including the Dash helmet. The F-5M has been equipped with new weapon systems such as the Beyond Visual Range Derby missile, Python IV short-range air-to-air missile, SMKB \"smart\" bombs, and several other weapons.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nThe F-5 entered service with the USAF's 4441st Combat Crew Training Squadron at Williams Air Force Base, which had the role of training pilots and ground crew for customer nations, including Norway, on 30 April 1964. At that point, it was still not intended that the aircraft be used in significant numbers by the USAF itself.\nUSAF doctrine with regard to the F-5 changed following operational testing and limited deployment in 1965. Preliminary combat evaluation of the F-5A began at the Air Proving Ground Center, Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, in mid-1965 under the code name Project \"Sparrow Hawk\". One airframe was lost in the course of the project, through pilot error, on 24 June.\nIn October 1965, the USAF began a five-month combat evaluation of the F-5A titled \"Skoshi Tiger\". A total of 12 aircraft were delivered for trials to the 4503rd Tactical Fighter Squadron, and after modification with probe and drogue aerial refueling equipment, armor and improved instruments, were redesignated \"F-5C\". Over the next six months, they flew in combat in the Vietnam War, flying more than 2,600 sorties, both from the 3rd Tactical Fighter Wing at Bien Hoa Air Base over South Vietnam and from Da Nang Air Base, where operations were flown over Laos. Nine aircraft were lost in Vietnam, seven to enemy ground fire and two to operational causes.\nOperations were declared a success, with the F-5 generally rated as being as capable a ground-attacker as the F-100, albeit having a shorter range. However, the program was more a political gesture that was intended to aid the export of F-5s than a serious consideration of the type for US service. (Following \"Skoshi Tiger\" the Philippine Air Force acquired 23 F-5A and B models in 1965. These aircraft, along with remanufactured Vought F-8 Crusaders, eventually replaced the Philippine Air Force's F-86 Sabres in the air defense and ground attack roles.)\nFrom April 1966, the USAF aircraft continued operations under the auspices of the 10th Fighter Squadron, Commando, with their number boosted to 17 aircraft.\nIn June 1967, the surviving aircraft of the 10th Fighter Squadron, Commando, were transferred to the Republic of Vietnam Air Force (RVNAF). In view of the performance, agility and size of the F-5, it might have appeared to be a good match against the similar MiG-21 in air combat; however, US doctrine was to use heavy, faster and longer-range aircraft like the Republic F-105 Thunderchief and McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II over North Vietnam.\nThe F-5 was also adopted as an opposing forces (OPFOR) \"aggressor\" for dissimilar training role because of its small size and performance similarities to the Soviet MiG-21. In realistic trials at Nellis AFB in 1977, called ACEVAL/AIMVAL, the F-14 reportedly scored slightly better than a 2:1 kill ratio against the simpler F-5, while the F-15 scored slightly less. There is some contradiction of these reports, another source reports that \"For the first three weeks of the test, the F-14s and F-15s were hopelessly outclassed and demoralized\"; after adapting to qualities of the F-5 carrying the new all aspect AIM-9L missile and implementing rule changes to artificially favor long range radar-guided missiles, \"the F-14s did slightly better than breaking even with the F-5s in non-1 v 1 engagements; the F-15s got almost 2:1\". A 2012 Discovery Channel documentary \"Great Planes\" reported that in USAF exercises, F-5 aggressor aircraft were competitive enough with more modern and expensive fighters to only be at small disadvantage in Within Visual Range (WVR) combat.\nThe F-5E served with the US Air Force from 1975 until 1990, in the 64th Aggressor Squadron and 65th Aggressor Squadron at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada, and with the 527th Aggressor Squadron at RAF Alconbury in the UK and the 26th Aggressor Squadron at Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines. The US Marines purchased used F-5s from the Air Force in 1989 to replace their F-21s, which served with VMFT-401 at Marine Corps Air Station Yuma. The US Navy used the F-5E extensively at the Naval Fighter Weapons School (TOPGUN) when it was located at NAS Miramar, California. When TOPGUN relocated to become part of the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center at NAS Fallon, Nevada, the command divested itself of the F-5, choosing to rely on VC-13 (redesignated VFC-13 and which already used F-5s) to employ their F-5s as adversary aircraft. Former adversary squadrons such as VF-43 at NAS Oceana, VF-45 at NAS Key West, VF-126 at NAS Miramar, and VFA-127 at NAS Lemoore have also operated the F-5 along with other aircraft types in support of Dissimilar Air Combat Training (DACT).\nThe US Navy F-5 fleet continues to be modernized with 36 low-hour F-5E/Fs purchased from Switzerland in 2006. These were updated as F-5N/Fs with modernized avionics and other improved systems. Currently, the only US Navy and US Marine Corps units flying the F-5 are VFC-13 at NAS Fallon, Nevada, VFC-111 at NAS Key West, Florida and VMFT-401 at MCAS Yuma, Arizona. Currently, VFC-111 operates 18 Northrop F-5N/F Tiger IIs. 17 of these are single-seater F-5Ns and the last is a twin-seater F-5F \"FrankenTiger\", the product of grafting the older front-half fuselage of an F-5F into the back-half fuselage of a newer low-hours F-5E acquired from the Swiss Air Force. A total of three \"FrankenTigers\" were made.\nAccording to the FAA, there are 18 privately owned F-5s in the US, including Canadair CF-5Ds.\nBrazil.\nIn October 1974, the Brazilian Air Force (\"FAB\") ordered 36 F-5E and 6 F-5B aircraft from Northrop for $72 million. The first three aircraft arrived on 12 March 1975. In 1988, FAB acquired 22 F-5E and four F-5F second-hand USAF \"aggressor\" fighters. A total of 15 of these aircraft were part of the initial batch of 30 aircraft produced by Northrop. In 1990, FAB retired all remaining five F-5Bs; later, they were sent to Brazilian museums around the country.\nIn 2001, Elbit Systems and Embraer started work on a $230 million Brazilian F-5 modernization program, performed over an eight-year period, upgrading 46 F-5E/F aircraft, re-designated as F-5EM and F-5FM. The modernization centered on several areas: new electronic warfare systems, the Grifo F radar, an air-to-air refueling system, INS/GPS-based navigation, support for new weapons, targeting and self-defense systems, HOTAS, LCD displays, helmet-mounted displays (HMDs), Radar Warning Receiver, encrypted communications, cockpit compatibility for night vision goggles, On-Board Oxygen Generation System (OBOGS) and various new onboard computer upgrades. One important capability is the secure communication with R-99 airborne early warning platforms and ground stations.\nExternally, the new aircraft features a larger nose cone that accommodates the larger radar equipment. The first F-5EM was handed over on 21 September 2005. On 7 July 2003, four Rafael Litening III targeting pods were ordered at a cost of US$13 million, to be used on F-5M together with three Rafael Sky Shield jamming pods ordered on 5 July 2006 at a cost of US$42 million.\nIn 2009, FAB bought eight single-seat and three twin-seat F-5F used aircraft from Jordan in a US$21 million deal. These aircraft were built between 1975 and 1980. On 14 April 2011, a contract of $153 million was signed with Embraer and Elbit to modernize the additional F-5s bought from Jordan, and to supply one more flight simulator as a continuation of the contract signed in 2000. These F-5s will receive the same configuration as those from the initial 46 F-5s currently completing the upgrade process. The first delivery of this second batch of upgraded jet fighters is scheduled for 2013 with expected use to 2030.\nIn 2020, the FAB started implementing the new proprietary Datalink System of the Brazilian Armed Forces on the F-5EM, for integrated communication and real-time sharing battlefield/warfare data with AEW&amp;C R-99/E-99 FAB/Embraer aircraft, other aircraft, ships, helicopters, tanks and front/back-ends battlefield control centers, called Link-BR2.\nEthiopia.\nEthiopia received 10 F-5As and two F-5Bs from the US starting in 1966. In addition to these, Ethiopia had a training squadron equipped with at least eight Lockheed T-33 Shooting Stars. In 1970, Iran transferred at least three F-5As and Bs to Ethiopia. In 1975, another agreement was reached with the US to deliver a number of military aircraft, including 14 F-5Es and three F-5Fs; later in the same year eight F-5Es were transferred while the others were embargoed and delivered to a USAF aggressor Squadron due to the changed political situation. The US also withdrew its personnel and cut diplomatic relations. Ethiopian officers contracted a number of Israelis to maintain American equipment.\nThe Ethiopian F-5 fighters saw combat action against Somali forces during the Ogaden War (1977\u20131978). The main Somali fighter aircraft was the MiG-21MF delivered in the 1970s, supported by Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17s delivered in the 1960s by the Soviet Union. Ethiopian F-5E aircraft were used to gain air superiority because they could use the AIM-9B air-to-air missile, while the F-5As were kept for air interdiction and airstrike. During this period Ethiopian F-5Es went on training against Ethiopian F-5As and F-86 Sabres (simulating Somali MiG-21s and MiG-17s).\nOn 17 July 1977, two F-5s were on combat air patrol near Harer, when four Somali MiG-21MFs were detected nearby. In the engagement, two MiG-21s were shot down while the other two had a midair collision while avoiding an AIM-9B missile. The better-trained F-5 pilots swiftly gained air superiority over the Somali Air Force, shooting down a number of aircraft, while other Somali aircraft were lost to air defense and to incidents. Records indicate that Ethiopian F-5s of the 9th Fighter Squadron \"shot down 13 MiGs-17 and 12 MiGs-21 from 20th July until 1st September 1977. All aircraft were hit by Sidewinders (AIM-9).\" However at least three F-5s were shot down by air defense forces during attacks against supply bases in western Somalia.\nEthiopian pilots who had flown both the F-5E and the MiG-21 considered the F-5E to be the superior fighter because of its manoeuvrability at low to medium speeds and the fact that it was far easier to fly, allowing the pilot to focus on combat rather than controlling his airplane. This effect was enhanced by the poor quality of pilot training provided by the Soviets, which provided limited flight time and focused exclusively on taking off and landing, with no practical training in air combat.\nEthiopia's ace pilot and national hero was Legesse Tefera who is credited with shooting down 6 (or 7) Somali MiGs, thus making him the most successful F-5 pilot.\nGreece.\nThe Hellenic Air Force was the first European air force to receive the Freedom Fighter. The first F-5As were delivered in 1965, and over the next 8 years a total of about 70 F-5A/Bs were operational. The Hellenic Air Force bought an additional 10 F-5A/Bs from Iran in 1975, and around the same period another batch of 10 F-5A/Bs were acquired from Jordan. Another 10 were acquired from Norway in 1986, and a final 10 NF-5As were purchased from the Netherlands in 1991. The total number of F-5s in operation (including the ex-Iranian machines, 34 RF-5As, and 20 F-5Bs) in the Hellenic Air Force was about 120 aircraft, from 1965 to 2002, when the last F-5 was decommissioned and the type went out of operation in the Hellenic Air Force.\nUnits that used the F-5 in Greek service:\nIran.\nThe Imperial Iranian Air Force (IIAF) received extensive US equipment in the 1960s and 1970s. Iran received its first 11 F-5As and two F-5Bs in February 1965 which were then declared operational in June 1965. Ultimately, Iran received 104 F-5As and 23 F-5Bs by 1972. From January 1974 with the first squadron of 28 F-5Fs, Iran received a total of 166 F-5E/Fs and 15 additional RF-5As with deliveries ending in 1976. While receiving the F-5E and F, Iran began to sell its F-5A and B inventory to other countries, including Ethiopia, Turkey, Greece and South Vietnam; by 1976, many had been sold, except for several F-5Bs retained for training purposes. F-5s were also used by the IIAF's aerobatic display team, the Golden Crown.\nAfter the Iranian revolution in 1979, the new Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force (IRIAF) was partially successful at keeping Western fighters in service during the Iran\u2013Iraq War in the 1980s and the simple F-5 had a good service readiness until late in the war. Initially, Iran took spare parts from foreign sources; later it was able to have its new aircraft industry keep the aircraft flying.\nIRIAF F-5s were heavily involved, flying air-to-air and air-to-ground sorties. Iranian F-5s took part in air combat with Iraqi MiG-21s, MiG-23s, MiG-25s, Su-20/22s, Mirage F1s and Super Etendards. The exact combat record is not known with many differing claims from Iraqi, Iranian, Western, and Russian sources. There are reports that an IRIAF F-5E, piloted by Major Yadollah Javadpour, shot down a MiG-25 on 6 August 1983. Russian sources state that the first confirmed kill of a MiG-25 occurred in 1985.\nDuring their first years of service, Iranian F-5s had the advantage in missile technology, using advanced versions of the infrared homing AIM-9 Sidewinder, later lost with deliveries of new missiles and fighters to Iraq.\nIran Aircraft Manufacturing Industrial Company currently produces three aircraft, the Azarakhsh, Saeqeh, and Kowsar, derived from the F-5.\nKenya.\nIn June 1976, Kenya ordered 10 new F-5E and two F-5F aircraft from the U.S. for $70 million.\nStarting on 16 October 2011 during Operation Linda Nchi, Kenyan Air Force F-5s supported the Kenyan forces fighting in Somalia against Al Shabab Islamists bombing targets inside Somalia and spearheading the ground forces.\nMalaysia.\nIn 1975, the Royal Malaysian Air Force received 14 F-5Es and two F-5Bs. In 1982, four F-5Fs were received and the two F-5Bs already in Malaysian service were transferred to the Royal Thai Air Force. In 1983, RMAF received two RF-5E Tigereye. Subsequently, two F-5Es (M29-21 &amp; M29-22) and a F-5F (M29-23) which came with the new \"shark nose\" and with leading edge root extensions (LERX) version were ordered as attrition replacement. The F-5E was the first supersonic fighter in Royal Malaysian Air Force service and it replaced the former RAAF CAC Sabre as the Royal Malaysian Air Force's primary air defense fighter throughout the 1980s and early '90s. It also served in secondary ground attack role alongside the Douglas A-4 Skyhawk. Five F-5Es and one F-5F were lost in the accident with three fatalities (2 pilots in E (1983 &amp; 1995) and 1 in F (1986), all crashed into the sea). In 2000, all the RMAF F-5s were deactivated, but they were reactivated in 2003 as the Tactical Air Reconnaissance Squadron and Reserve. Several upgrade packages were proposed to extend the service life of the aircraft, but none were taken. In 2015, the F-5s were pulled out of service, but some were kept in storage.\nMexico.\nIn 1982, the Mexican Air Force received 10 F-5Es and two F-5Fs after the purchase of 24 IAI Kfir C.1 was blocked by the US, because the Kfir used the American-produced J79 engine. These fighters complemented the Lockheed T-33 and de Havilland Vampire Mk. I (received much earlier), two of the first combat jet aircraft in Mexico. The F-5 gave Mexico its first supersonic warplane, and it saw the formation of Air Squadron 401. On 16 September 1995, after more than 30 military parade flights without incidents, an F-5E collided in midair with three Lockheed T-33s during the military parade for the Independence of Mexico resulting in 10 deaths. As of 2021, the Mexican Air Force has five Northrop F-5E and two F-5F fighters combat ready and for training purposes.\nMorocco.\nThe Royal Moroccan Air Force received 22 F-5As, two F-5Bs and two RF-5As from the United States between 1966 and 1974. These entered service with the 1st Fighter Squadron. Two additional F-5As were donated by Iran in 1974, and six F-5As were acquired from Jordan in 1976. Three F-5As were involved in the failed 1972 Moroccan coup attempt, attacking King Hassan II of Morocco's Boeing 727 in mid-air, before strafing and bombing a military airfield and the royal palace. After the failure of the attempted coup, nearly all F-5 pilots were arrested, and most of them disappeared. Another consequence of the failed coup was that the designation system of Moroccan air force units changed from numerical designations to names. From then on, the F-5A squadron was known as the Borak squadron.\nMorocco used its F-5s in the Western Sahara War in reconnaissance and bombing missions. Several aircraft were shot down by 9K32 Strela-2 MANPADS, machine-gun fire, and 9K31 Strela-1 (SA-9) and 2K12 Kub (SA-6) self-propelled anti-aircraft systems. To counter the SA-6 threat, AN/ALR-66 radar warning receivers were installed on the RF-5As and F-5Bs around 1981. These aircraft were grouped into a newly established dedicated reconnaissance unit, the Erige squadron; one of its main tasks was to track the Polisario Front's surface-to-air missile systems.\nIn the same period, Morocco started receiving 16 F-5Es and four F-5Fs, that had been ordered in 1979 thanks to Saudi financing. Deliveries lasted from 1981 to 1983. Shortly after their arrival, the F-5Es were fitted with the same radar warning receivers as the RF-5As and F-5Bs; they also received in-flight refuelling probes. Lastly, Moroccan F-5Es could be equipped with electronic and infrared countermeasures pods, that enhanced their survivability against Polisario surface-to-air missiles. F-5E/Fs were operated by the Borak and Erige squadrons, where they served together with older F-5 versions, as well as the Chahine squadron. During the war in Western Sahara, Moroccan F-5s deployed general-purpose and cluster bombs, unguided rockets, and more rarely AGM-65 Maverick missiles. In total, 15 F-5s are confirmed to have been lost in the course of the Western Sahara War.\nStarting in 1990, Morocco received 12 more F-5Es from the United States, a total of 24 F-5Es having been upgraded to the F-5TIII standard.\nNetherlands.\nIn the mid-1960s, the Royal Netherlands Air Force (RNLAF) recognized that its fleet of F-84F fighter-bombers and T-33 trainers was in need of replacement. A deal was made with Canadair to produce modified versions of their license-built CF-5A single-seater and CF-5D twin-seater, which where given the designation NF-5A and NF-5B respectively. The NF-5 differed from the CF-5 mainly in having maneuvering flaps, a radar altimeter and a roller map display. Later modifications included the addition of chaff/flare dispensers and a radar warning system.\nThe first NF-5A was handed over in October 1969 at Twente Air Base for 313 Squadron acting as Operational Conversion Unit. The last aircraft was handed over in March 1972. The NF-5As flew under the Dutch registrations K-3001 / K-3075 and the NF-5Bs under K-4002 / K-4030. They were operational at Twenthe AB (OCU, 313 and 315 Squadrons), Eindhoven AB (314 Squadron) and Gilze-Rijen AB (316 Squadron). In total, the RNLAF would receive 75 NF-5As and 30 NF-5Bs.\nDuring the RNLAF transition to the F-16, the NF-5s and Bs were stored at Gilze-Rijen and Woensdrecht air bases. 60 aircraft were sold to Turkey, 11 to Greece and 7 to Venezuela. Some aircraft have been written off during their operational life due to crashes and some remaining aircraft are displayed in museums or used in technical schools. The NF-5As and Bs were operational from 1971 to 1991.\nNorway.\nThe Royal Norwegian Air Force received 108 Freedom Fighters: 16 RF-5A, 78 F-5A and 14 F-5B. The first 64 were received as military aid. They were used by six squadrons, the first and last being 336 Squadron receiving the first aircraft in February 1966 (formal handing-over ceremony a month later), and deactivating in August 2000. Three aircraft were kept flying until 2007, serving with Kongsberg Defence &amp; Aerospace for tests in the \"Eye of the Tiger\" program, supporting development of the Norwegian Penguin anti-ship missile. The aircraft received under military aid were handed off to Greece and Turkey. Of the aircraft bought by the Norwegian government, nine were used in exchange with US authorities for submarines of the .\nIn October 2011 five F-5A single seaters were given to aircraft maintenance schools around the country; including the Skedsmo, Sola, Bod\u00f8, and Bardufoss high schools, and the Royal Norwegian Air Force's training center at Kristiansand Airport, Kjevik. The aircraft were disassembled at Moss Airport, Rygge, before delivery to the schools. Of the ten remaining Norwegian F-5s, eight F-5B two-seaters were still for sale as of 2011, six of which were stored in Norway and two in the United States. The two aircraft in the United States had been approved for sale to the American businessman Ross Perot Jr., in 2008, but the deal was blocked by the US government initially. However, in 2015, Perot Jr. got permission and subsequently bought the aircraft for significantly below market price, which caused controversy and public criticism of the government of Norway. Three survivors are exhibited at the Norwegian Armed Forces Aircraft Collection, two at Norsk Luftfartsmuseum in Bod\u00f8 and one at Flyhistorisk Museum, Sola, near Stavanger.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippine Air Force acquired 37 F-5A and F-5B from 1965 to 1998. The F-5A/Bs were used by the 6th Tactical Fighter Squadron (Cobras) of the 5th Fighter Wing and the Blue Diamonds aerobatic team, replacing the F-86F Sabre previously used by 1965 and 1968 respectively. The F-5s also underwent an upgrade which equipped it with surplus AN/APQ-153 radars with significant overhaul at the end of the 1970s to stretch their service lives another 15 years.\nIn 2005, the Philippines decommissioned its remaining F-5A/B fleet, including those received from Taiwan and South Korea.\nSingapore.\nSingapore is an important operator of the F-5E/F variant, first ordering the aircraft in 1976 during a massive expansion of the city-state's armed forces; delivery of this first batch of 18 F-5Es and three F-5Fs was completed by late February 1979, equipping the newly formed-up No. 144 \"Black Kite\" Squadron at Tengah Air Base. At the end of 1979, an order was placed for six more F-5Es, which were delivered by 1981. In 1982, an order for three more F-5Fs was placed, these were forward delivered in September 1983 to RAF Leuchars in Scotland where they were taken over by pilots of the Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF). In 1983, the type took over the duties of airborne interception from the Royal Australian Air Force's Mirage IIIOs detachment (rotated between No. 3 &amp; No. 75 Squadron RAAF) stationed at \"Tengah\".\nAnother order for six more F-5Es was placed in 1985, these were delivered the same year and would go on to equip the newly formed-up No. 149 \"Shikra\" Squadron at \"Tengah\". The following year, the RSAF placed an order for its final batch of three F-5Fs and five F-5Es, these were delivered in December 1987 and July 1989, respectively. In a bid to modernize its air force, the Royal Jordanian Air Force put up seven F-5Es for sale in 1994, these were later acquired by Singapore.\nFrom 1990 to 1991, using jigs and toolings purchased from Northrop, Singapore Aircraft Industries (SAI, now ST Aerospace) converted eight existing F-5Es into RF-5E Tigereye variant. Subsequently, these were used to reequip No. 141 \"Merlin\" Squadron, which had traded in their older Hawker Hunter FR.74S for the newer Tigereyes in 1992 and was by then based at Paya Lebar Air Base, after the 144 Squadron had relocated there in 1986. By June 1993, all three squadrons had been relocated to the base, thus consolidating Singapore's F-5E/F operations at \"Paya Lebar\".\nIn 1991, SAI was awarded a contract as the prime contractor to modernize all RSAF F-5E/Fs (including the 7 ex-Jordanian F-5Es); Elbit Systems was the sub-contractor responsible for systems integration. Upgrades include a new X band multi-mode radar (the Italian \"FIAR Grifo-F\", with Beyond-visual-range missile and Look-down/shoot-down capabilities), a revamped cockpit with new MIL-STD-1553R databuses, GEC/Ferranti 4510 Head-up display/weapons delivery system, two BAE Systems MED-2067 Multi-function displays, Litton LN-93 INS (similar to the ST Aerospace A-4SU Super Skyhawk) and Hands On Throttle-And-Stick controls (HOTAS) to reduce pilot workload. Reportedly, the Elisra SPS2000 radar warning receiver and countermeasure system was also installed.\nIn addition, the starboard M39 20\u00a0mm cannon mounted in the nose was removed to make way for additional avionics (the sole cannon on the two-seaters was removed because of this), and to improve maneuverability, upgraded aircraft received larger leading edge root extensions (LERX). The process began in March 1996 and was completed by 2001, receiving the new designation of \"F-5S/T\". In 1998, the eight RF-5Es also received the upgrades (except for the radar) and were redesignated as \"RF-5S\". Each F-5S/T upgraded reportedly cost SGD$6 million.\nBy end of 2009, the type had accumulated more than 170,000 hours of flight time in Singapore service with only two F-5Es being lost in separate accidents (in 1984 and 1991, respectively). 144 Squadron, the last squadron operating F-5Es, disbanded in September 2015 after the F-5S was retired.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Republic of Korea Air Force (ROKAF) purchased F-5A/Bs in 1965, and it purchased F-5Es in August 1974. KF-5 variants were built by Korean Air under license between 1982 and 1986.\nThe F-5E/Fs and KF-5E/Fs were to be replaced by FA-50s and after 2001, by the plans to eventually field the Korean F-X Phase 3.\nSpain.\nSpain has operated F-5 many decades, and upgrades in the early 21st century there is still in service in the 2020s although they are reaching the end of their career.\nOn 11 January 1965 Spain announced the choice of the F-5 to replace their T-33 and F-86. During the evaluation phase, an F-5B crashed near Torrej\u00f3n Air Base, killing both occupants, a Northrop pilot and a pilot from the Ej\u00e9rcito del Aire. The contract included 70 units, 8 of them being manufactured by Northrop, 2 disassembled and assembled in Spain, and the remaining 6 in the form of components and structures ready construction. The remaining 62 would be built under license by CASA in the factory at Getafe. The first of this Spanish built batch would take off on 22 May 1968 from the Getafe Air Base flown by a Northrop test pilot. The first delivery to the Ej\u00e9rcito del Aire would be on 19 June 1969, being 2 F-5B for the 202 Escuadr\u00f3n, based at Mor\u00f3n de la Frontera. The first delivery consisted on all F-5B, being the single-seater F-5A and RF-5A delivered later. The last of the 70 airframes was received by the Ej\u00e9rcito del Aire on 11 April 1972.\nThe F-5B was ascribed to the Ala 73 at Talavera la Real Air Base, dedicated to training. Additionally to the aforementioned Escuadr\u00f3n 202, the Escuadr\u00f3n 204 received RF-5A. This unit would later become the Ala 21 in 1971.\nWith the increasing tension with Morocco during the later phase of the Francoist government, the Spanish CASA/Northrop F-5A saw action during the conflict in the Spanish Sahara, being deployed at the Gando Air Base with more than 500 real combat missions. This deployment became permanent from 1974 on, being formalized in 1976. Two F-5B and all F-5A with even registration were ascribed to Ala 46 in the Escuadr\u00f3n 464 at the Gando Air Base, until their replacement in 1982 by the newly acquired Dassault-Breguet F1EE, being the F-5 sent back to Mor\u00f3n de la Frontera.\nIn 1989 a mid-air accident is suffered by an F-5B due to a structural failure of a wing. All F-5 fleet is grounded in search for signs of material fatigue, and as a result of it, many of them are retired. The remaining single-seaters (F-5A and RF-5A) are transferred in 1995 to the Ala 23 in Talavera la Real, together with some of the retired airframes, used for spare parts. That would be the final destination of the Spanish single-seaters where they would be retired over the late 1990s.\nOn the other hand, as a result of the 1990 accident, all twin-seaters are sent to the CASA Getafe Factory to be maintained and renovated. A new modernisation program in 2008 intended to extend their operational life until 2025, receiving glass cockpits and zero-zero ejection seats.\nAs of the early 2020s, Spain has a fleet of about 20 F-5s that it is planning to operate until at least 2028, as no replacement has yet been found. The aircraft have been in service for about 50 years and, with continued maintenance, have several years of service.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Swiss Air Force flies a total of 22 F-5E and 4 F-5F aircraft, down from a peak of 98 and 12 in 1981. They were chosen chiefly because of their excellent performance, suitability for the unique Swiss Air Force mission, and their relatively low maintenance cost per flight hour.\nIt had been expected these aircraft would be replaced by the Saab JAS 39 Gripen, but in May 2014, a referendum by the Swiss people decided against the purchase of the Gripens.\nFor the foreseeable future, the Swiss Air Force will continue to fly its present F-5s. There are still plans by the Swiss Air Force and in the Swiss parliament to fly 18 F-5E and four F-5F models. This would also include the continued operation of the Patrouille Suisse, in F-5Es until 2018.\nIn September 2020 the Swiss people voted yes in a referendum to get a replacement. With 50.1% to 49.9% and only 8670 votes between.\nThe Swiss Air Force has decided to replace the aircraft with 36 F-35As.\nIn March 2024, The Swiss Federal Office for Armaments started delivery of 22 decommissioned F-5E/F Tiger II fighter jets to the United States. The first aircraft was picked up by the United States Marine Corps on 18 March from Emmen Air Force Station aboard a Lockheed KC-130J transport aircraft. The sale, finalized in 2020, encompasses 16 single-seat F-5E and 6 twin-seat F-5F variants, along with associated ground equipment, spare parts, and logistical support for in-country storage and preparation for transport to the U.S. The total value of the sale is estimated at $32.4 million.\nTaiwan.\nThe Republic of China Air Force (ROCAF, Taiwan's air force) received its first batch of seven F-5As and two F-5Bs under the US Military Assistance Program in 1965. By 1971, the ROCAF was operating 72 F-5As and 11 F-5Bs. During 1972, the US borrowed 48 ROCAF F-5As to lend to the Republic of Vietnam Air Force before the withdrawal of US forces from Vietnam. By 1973, most of those loaned F-5As were not in flying condition, thus the US opted to return 20 F-5As to Taiwan by drawing nine F-5As from US reserves while repairing 11 from South Vietnam. An additional 28 new F-5Es were issued to Taiwan by May 1975. By 1973, Taiwan's AIDC started local production of a first batch of 100 F-5Es, the first of six Peace Tiger production batches. By end of 1986 when the production line closed after completing Peace Tiger 6, the AIDC had produced 242 F-5Es and 66 F-5Fs. Taiwan was the largest operator of the type at one time, having 336 F-5E/Fs in inventory. The last batch of AIDC F-5E/Fs featured the F-20's shark nose.\nWith the introduction of 150 F-16s, 60 Mirage 2000-5s and 130 F-CK-1s in the mid-to-late-1990s, the F-5E/F series became second line fighters in ROCAF service and mostly are now withdrawn from service as squadrons converted to new fighters entering ROCAF service. Seven low airframe hours F-5Es were sent to ST Aerospace to convert them to RF-5E standard to fulfill a reconnaissance role previously undertaken by the retiring Lockheed RF-104G in ROCAF service. As of 2009, only about 40 ROCAF F-5E/Fs still remain in service in training roles with about 90\u2013100 F-5E/Fs held in reserve. The other retired F-5E/F are either scrapped, or used as decoys painted in colors representing the main front line F-16, Mirage 2000-5 or F-CK-1 fighters, and deployed around major air bases.\nTaiwan also tried to upgrade the F-5E/F fleet with AIDC's Tiger 2000/2001 program. The first flight took place on 24 July 2002. The program would replace the F-5E/F's radar with F-CK-1's GD-53 radar and allow the fighter to carry a single TC-2 BVRAAM on the centerline. But lack of interest from the ROCAF eventually killed the program. The only prototype is on display in AIDC in Central Taiwan.\nOn 22 March 2021, two Taiwanese pilots flying F-5E's crashed into each other during a training mission resulting in the third crash within six months. Two pilots died after the crash.\nSouth Vietnam / Vietnam.\nIn June 1967, the US donated the surviving aircraft of 10th FCS USAF to South Vietnam. The president of South Vietnam had asked the US for F-4 Phantoms, but these were in high demand, while the Republic of Vietnam Air Force (RVNAF) was flying only ground support missions, operating only Douglas A-1 Skyraider attackers at that point. In addition, the North Vietnamese Vietnam People's Air Force (VPAF) was not sending aircraft over South Vietnam. Hence the RVNAF did not require an aircraft with advanced air to air capabilities (like the F-4). A dedicated RVNAF unit was formed \u2013 the 522nd Fighter Squadron.\n248 RVNAF aircraft were flown out of South Vietnam to Thailand during the Fall of Saigon in 1975. At least 25 F-5Es were reclaimed by the US, while one F-5B was transferred to Thailand. North Vietnam captured approximately 877 aircraft, of which 87 were reported as F-5As and 27 were F-5Es.\nIn November 1975, the Vietnamese government gave the Soviet military an opportunity to select captured US equipment for research and intelligence purposes. A complete F-5, along with two complete spare engines, spare parts, and ground support equipment, were loaded onto a Soviet cargo ship. Several other F-5s were later transferred by Vietnam to the USSR, Poland and Czechoslovakia.\nThe VPAF reportedly used 41 F-5s operationally. Others were decommissioned and put on display at museums in Vietnam. The 935th Fighter Regiment of the VPAF 372nd Air Division became the only unit in the world to simultaneously fly both the MiG-21 and F-5. The type was used for combat by the VPAF, in ground\u2013attack sorties against the Khmer Rouge.\nGradually, a lack of critical spare parts in Vietnam caused initially by a US embargo and later by termination of manufacturing and dwindling stocks \u2013 grounded the remaining F-5s. However, in May 2017 it was reported that the VPAF was considering upgrading particular systems in some retired aircraft, in order to put them back into service.\nVenezuela.\nAfter a reorganization of the Venezuelan Air Force in the late 1960s, the government realized that it was time to replace its obsolete de Havilland Vampires and Venoms active at that time, as well as the last surviving F-86 Sabres in active duty. In 1971, 54 Canadian-built CF-5As were put in storage, after the RCAF could not take them due to budget cuts. From this batch, Venezuela acquired 16 CF-5As and two CF-5Ds. In 1972, after all the aircraft were delivered, the F-86s, Venoms, and Vampires were finally scrapped.\nThe F-5 became the first military plane in Venezuela capable of flying at supersonic speeds. After a legal dispute between Canadair and Northrop, two more CF-5Ds were built and delivered to Venezuela in 1974. Their first base of operations was the General Rafael Urdaneta Air Base in Maracaibo. After 1974, the fleet was relocated to Teniente Vicente Landaeta Gil Air Base in Barquisimeto.\nIn 1979, after several upgrades to the fleet's communication, navigation and approximation equipment, the aircraft were renamed VF-5s, designating the CF-5As as VF-5As and the CF-5Ds as VF-5Ds. Venezuelan F-5s could also carry weaponry such as the AIM-9 Sidewinder missile, Mk.82 and M117 bombs, and 70mm rocket launchers.\nIn 1991, after tensions between Colombia and Venezuela almost led to a conflict, the air force started yet another modernization program for the F-5s, called \"Proyecto Grifo\" (Project Gryphon). Some aircraft (VF-5D number 5681 and VF-5A number 9124) were sent to Singapore for testing, then brought back for upgrade of the remaining airframes. That same year, a small fleet of four NF-5Bs and a single NF-5A, was acquired from the Netherlands to replace aircraft lost in previous years.\nIn 1992, during the coup d'\u00e9tat attempt against president Carlos Andres Perez, 3 F-5s were lost to a rebel-operated OV-10 Bronco bombing Barquisimeto Air Base. The failed coup delayed the modernization program for a year, finally coming together in 1993. The fleet was equipped with inertial laser navigation systems (similar to those in Venezuelan F-16s), IFFs, HUDs, refueling probes and modernized engines with an estimated lifespan of 22 years.\nIn 2002, small upgrades were made to the remaining F-5s. The fleet was kept operational until 2010, when a batch of Hongdu JL-8s was delivered as their replacement. By late 2010, it was known that at least one VF-5D was in flight-worthy condition; it is unknown if more aircraft are in operational condition.\nBetween 1972 and 2002, a total of 9 Venezuelan F-5s were lost.\nYemen.\nIn March 1979, following North Yemen's defeat in the Yemenite War of 1979, the United States gave Saudi Arabia the permission to transfer four Northrop F-5B trainers to North Yemen. Additionally, Saudi Arabia financed the procurement of twelve F-5E fighters. By the end of the year, all 16 aircraft had arrived. This did not leave enough time to properly train local pilots and ground crews to operate them. Hence, the Saudis agreed with Taiwan to deploy a group of 80 Republic of China Air Force pilots and ground personnel to Sana'a. They formed the 112th Squadron of the Yemen Arab Republic Air Force (YARAF), which was also known as the Desert Squadron. Most of the Squadron's members were Taiwanese until 1985, by when enough Yemenis were trained on the F-5 to take over their duties. However, some Taiwanese personnel remained in the country: in 1990, no less than 700 Taiwanese served in Yemen. They were finally withdrawn in 1991, after the Yemeni unification.\nNorth Yemeni F-5Es have seen combat during the 1994 civil war. On 6 May, two South Yemeni MiG-21s were claimed shot down by Major Nabi Ali Ahmad, using AIM-9 missiles. According to South Yemeni sources, only one MiG-21bis was shot down in an air combat, and its pilot killed. Reportedly, the North Yemenis subsequently deployed their Tiger IIs for air-to-air combat only. On 15 May, two helicopters (probably Mil Mi-8s) were shot down, one of them supposedly by Major Nabi Ali Ahmad. On 28 May, an F-5E was shot down by anti-aircraft fire. On 20 June, a South Yemeni MiG-21 was shot down over Al Anad Air Base in an air combat with two F-5Es, and its pilot was killed. Lastly, on 29 June, an encounter between two YARAF F-5Es and a single South Yemeni MiG-29 was reported. However, neither side opened fire.\nFollowing the North's victory in the civil war, the F-5 fleet was integrated into the unified Yemeni Air Force. However, the number of F-5s in service declined over the years. In 2003, there were negotiations with Singapore for the overhaul and upgrade of the remaining aircraft. However, nothing came out of it. Around 2010, only six aircraft were operational, partly thanks to US aid packages. In the night of 29\u201330 March 2015, at least one F-5B and one F-5E were destroyed on the ground at Sanaa International Airport by Royal Saudi Air Force bombardments, in the first days of the Saudi-led intervention.\nOthers.\nSaudi Arabia deployed F-5Es during the Gulf War, flying close air support and aerial interdiction missions against Iraqi units in Kuwait. One Royal Saudi Air Force F-5E was lost to ground fire on 13 February 1991, resulting in the death of the pilot.\nAeroGroup, a private commercial company in the US, operates the CF-5B as a fighter lead-in aircraft for training and for other support services. There were 17 aircraft originally purchased from the Canadian Government with US State Department approval and then imported into the US in 2006.\nSince 2013, Tunisian F-5s have been used in strike missions in support of major military offensives in the border region of Mount Chaambi against Ansar al-Sharia and al-Qaeda-linked militants.\nF-5s were used by the Libyan Air Force at Wheelus Air Base in Tripoli, Libya from 1968 to 1969.\nVariants.\nDerivatives.\nF-20 Tigershark.\nIn comparison to later fighters, the improved F-5E had some weaknesses; these included marginal acceleration, rearward visibility, and fuel fraction, and a lack of Beyond Visual Range (BVR) weapons once such radar\u2013guided missiles became reliable during the 1980s. The F-5G, later renamed the F-20 Tigershark, aimed to correct these weaknesses while maintaining a small size and low cost to produce a competitive fighter. Compared to the F-5E, it had 60% more power, a higher climb rate and acceleration, better cockpit visibility, more modern radar and BVR capability, and competitive performance with fourth generation fighters. Like the F-5, it had better cost\u2013effectiveness as it had the minimum necessary features relative to its competition to perform its air superiority mission. As an example, in the 1960s and early 1970s, the F-5's lack of BVR missiles was not a significant disadvantage as the kill rate of such missiles was approximately 8% to 10%, and the performance and loss of surprise (radar warning to the enemy) cost of carrying them was not practically justified. By the early 1980s, the American AIM-7 Sparrow radar-guided missile in its \"M\" version was realistically exceeding a 60% kill rate, and was integrated onto the F-20. Brigadier General Chuck Yeager, test pilot and the first man to break the sound barrier, referred to the F-20 as \"the finest fighter\". Despite its performance and affordable cost, the F-20 lost out for foreign sales against the similarly capable but more expensive F-16, which was being procured in large numbers by the US Air Force and was viewed as having greater support.\nNorthrop YF-17.\nThe Northrop YF-17's main design elements date from the F-5 based internal Northrop project N-300. The N-300 featured a longer fuselage, small leading-edge root extensions (LERX), and more powerful GE15-J1A1 turbojets. The wing was moved higher on the fuselage to increase ordnance flexibility. The N-300 further evolved into the P-530 Cobra. The P-530's wing planform and nose section was similar to the F-5, with a trapezoidal shape formed by a sweep of 20\u00b0 at the quarter-chord line, and an unswept trailing edge, but was over double the area. While the YF-17 lost its bid for the USAF lightweight fighter, it would be developed into the larger McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet.\nShaped Sonic Boom Demonstration.\nA single ex-USN F-5E was modified to carry out research into reducing noise from supersonic flight by shaping the shock waves produced by the aircraft.\nAircraft on display.\nCanada.\nsee Canadair CF-5\nSaudi Arabia.\n\u2022 F-5E Tiger II at Royal Saudi Air Force Museum"}
{"id": "11143", "revid": "9736351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11143", "title": "FDR (disambiguation)", "text": "FDR, or Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882\u20131945), was president of the United States from 1933 to 1945.\nFDR may also refer to:"}
{"id": "11144", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11144", "title": "Fresco", "text": "Fresco ( or frescoes) is a technique of mural painting executed upon freshly laid (\"wet\") lime plaster. Water is used as the vehicle for the dry-powder pigment to merge with the plaster, and with the setting of the plaster, the painting becomes an integral part of the wall. The word \"fresco\" () is derived from the Italian adjective \"fresco\" meaning \"fresh\", and may thus be contrasted with fresco-secco or secco mural painting techniques, which are applied to dried plaster, to supplement painting in fresco. The fresco technique has been employed since antiquity and is closely associated with Italian Renaissance painting.\nThe word \"fresco\" is commonly and inaccurately used in English to refer to any wall painting regardless of the plaster technology or binding medium. This, in part, contributes to a misconception that the most geographically and temporally common wall painting technology was the painting into wet lime plaster. Even in apparently \"buon fresco\" technology, the use of supplementary organic materials was widespread, if underrecognized.\nTechnology.\n\"Buon fresco\" pigment is mixed with room temperature water and is used on a thin layer of wet, fresh plaster, called the intonaco (after the Italian word for plaster). Because of the chemical makeup of the plaster, a binder is not required, as the pigment mixed solely with the water will sink into the intonaco, which itself becomes the medium holding the pigment. The pigment is absorbed by the wet plaster; after a number of hours, the plaster dries in reaction to air: it is this chemical reaction which fixes the pigment particles in the plaster.\nThe chemical processes are as follows:\nIn painting \"buon fresco\", a rough underlayer called the \"arriccio\" is added to the whole area to be painted and allowed to dry for some days. Many artists sketched their compositions on this underlayer, which would never be seen, in a red pigment called sinopia, a name also used to refer to these under-paintings. Later,new techniques for transferring paper drawings to the wall were developed. The main lines of a drawing made on paper were pricked over with a point, the paper held against the wall, and a bag of soot (\"spolvero\") banged on them to produce black dots along the lines. If the painting was to be done over an existing fresco, the surface would be roughened to provide better adhesion. On the day of painting, the intonaco, a thinner, smooth layer of fine plaster was added to the amount of wall that was expected to be completed that day, sometimes matching the contours of the figures or the landscape, but more often just starting from the top of the composition. This area is called the \"giornata\" (\"day's work\"), and the different day stages can usually be seen in a large fresco, by a faint seam that separates one from the next.\n\"Buon frescoes\" are difficult to create because of the deadline associated with the drying plaster. Generally, a layer of plaster will require ten to twelve hours to dry; ideally, an artist would begin to paint after one hour and continue until two hours before the drying time\u2014giving seven to nine hours' working time. Once a \"giornata\" is dried, no more \"buon fresco\" can be done, and the unpainted intonaco must be removed with a tool before starting again the next day. If mistakes have been made, it may also be necessary to remove the whole intonaco for that area\u2014or to change them later, \"a secco\".\nAn indispensable component of this process is the carbonatation of the lime, which fixes the colour in the plaster ensuring durability of the fresco for future generations.\nA technique used in the popular frescoes of Michelangelo and Raphael was to scrape indentations into certain areas of the plaster while still wet to increase the illusion of depth and to accent certain areas over others. The eyes of the people of the School of Athens are sunken-in using this technique which causes the eyes to seem deeper and more pensive. Michelangelo used this technique as part of his trademark 'outlining' of his central figures within his frescoes.\nIn a wall-sized fresco, there may be ten to twenty or even more \"giornate\", or separate areas of plaster. After five centuries, the \"giornate\", which were originally nearly invisible, have sometimes become visible, and in many large-scale frescoes, these divisions may be seen from the ground. Additionally, the border between giornate was often covered by an \"a secco\" painting, which has since fallen off.\nOne of the first painters in the post-classical period to use this technique was the Isaac Master (or Master of the Isaac fresco, and thus a name used to refer to the unknown master of a particular painting) in the Upper Basilica of Saint Francis in Assisi. A person who creates fresco is called a frescoist.\nOther types of wall painting.\nA secco or fresco-secco painting is done on dry plaster (\"secco\" meaning \"dry\" in Italian). The pigments thus require a binding medium, such as egg (tempera), glue or oil to attach the pigment to the wall. It is important to distinguish between \"a secco\" work done on top of \"buon fresco\", which according to most authorities was in fact standard from the Middle Ages onwards, and work done entirely \"a secco\" on a blank wall. Generally, \"buon fresco\" works are more durable than any \"a secco\" work added on top of them, because \"a secco\" work lasts better with a roughened plaster surface, whilst true fresco should have a smooth one. The additional \"a secco\" work would be done to make changes, and sometimes to add small details, but also because not all colours can be achieved in true fresco, because only some pigments work chemically in the very alkaline environment of fresh lime-based plaster. Blue was a particular problem, and skies and blue robes were often added \"a secco\", because neither azurite blue nor lapis lazuli, the only two blue pigments then available, works well in wet fresco.\nIt has also become increasingly clear, thanks to modern analytical techniques, that even in the early Italian Renaissance painters quite frequently employed \"a secco\" techniques so as to allow the use of a broader range of pigments. In most early examples this work has now entirely vanished, but a whole painting done \"a secco\" on a surface roughened to give a key for the paint may survive very well, although damp is more threatening to it than to \"buon fresco\".\nA third type called a \"mezzo-fresco\" is painted on nearly dry intonaco\u2014firm enough not to take a thumb-print, says the sixteenth-century author Ignazio Pozzo\u2014so that the pigment only penetrates slightly into the plaster. By the end of the sixteenth century this had largely displaced \"buon fresco\", and was used by painters such as Giovanni Battista Tiepolo or Michelangelo. This technique had, in reduced form, the advantages of \"a secco\" work.\nThe three key advantages of work done entirely \"a secco\" were that it was quicker, mistakes could be corrected, and the colours varied less from when applied to when fully dry\u2014in wet fresco there was a considerable change.\nFor wholly \"a secco\" work, the intonaco is laid with a rougher finish, allowed to dry completely and then usually given a key by rubbing with sand. The painter then proceeds much as he or she would on a canvas or wood panel.\nHistory.\nEgypt and ancient Near East.\nThe first known Egyptian fresco was found in Tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis, and dated to . Several of the themes and designs visible in the fresco are otherwise known from other Naqada II objects, such as the Gebel el-Arak Knife. It shows the scene of a \"Master of Animals\", a man fighting against two lions, individual fighting scenes, and Egyptian and foreign boats. Ancient Egyptians painted many tombs and houses, but those wall paintings are not frescoes.\nAn old fresco from Mesopotamia is the \"Investiture of Zimri-Lim\" (modern Syria), dating from the early 18th century BC.\nAegean civilizations.\nThe oldest frescoes done in the \"buon fresco\" method date from the first half of the second millennium BCE during the Bronze Age and are to be found among Aegean civilizations, more precisely Minoan art from the island of Crete and other islands of the Aegean Sea. The most famous of these, the \"Bull-Leaping Fresco\", depicts a sacred ceremony in which individuals jump over the backs of large bulls. The oldest surviving Minoan frescoes are found on the island of Santorini (classically known as Thera), dated to the Neo-Palatial period ().\nWhile some similar frescoes have been found in other locations around the Mediterranean basin, particularly in Egypt and Morocco, their origins are subject to speculation. Some art historians believe that fresco artists from Crete may have been sent to various locations as part of a trade exchange, a possibility which raises to the fore the importance of this art form within the society of the times. The most common form of \"fresco\" was Egyptian wall paintings in tombs, usually using the \"a secco\" technique.\nClassical antiquity.\nFrescoes were also painted in ancient Greece, but few of these works have survived. In southern Italy, at Paestum, which was a Greek colony of the Magna Graecia, a tomb containing frescoes dating back to 470 BC, the so-called Tomb of the Diver, was discovered in June 1968. These frescoes depict scenes of the life and society of ancient Greece, and constitute valuable historical testimonials. One shows a group of men reclining at a symposium, while another shows a young man diving into the sea. Etruscan frescoes, dating from the 4th century BC, have been found in the Tomb of Orcus near Veii, Italy.\nThe richly decorated Thracian frescoes of the Tomb of Kazanlak are dating back to 4th century BC, making it a UNESCO protected World Heritage Site.\nRoman wall paintings, such as those at the magnificent Villa dei Misteri (1st century BC) in the ruins of Pompeii, and others at Herculaneum, were completed in \"buon fresco.\"\nRoman (Christian) frescoes from the 1st to 2nd centuries AD were found in catacombs beneath Rome, and Byzantine icons were also found in Cyprus, Crete, Ephesus, Cappadocia, and Antioch. Roman frescoes were done by the artist painting the artwork on the still damp plaster of the wall, so that the painting is part of the wall, actually colored plaster.\nAlso a historical collection of Ancient Christian frescoes can be found in the Churches of G\u00f6reme.\nIndia.\nThanks to large number of ancient rock-cut cave temples, valuable ancient and early medieval frescoes have been preserved in more than 20 locations of India.\nThe frescoes on the ceilings and walls of the Ajanta Caves were painted between and are the oldest known frescoes in India. They depict the Jataka tales that are stories of the Buddha's life in former existences as Bodhisattva. The narrative episodes are depicted one after another although not in a linear order. Their identification has been a core area of research on the subject since the time of the site's rediscovery in 1819. Other locations with valuable preserved ancient and early medieval frescoes include Bagh Caves, Ellora Caves, Sittanavasal, Armamalai Cave, Badami Cave Temples and other locations. Frescoes have been made in several techniques, including tempera technique.\nThe later Chola paintings were discovered in 1931 within the circumambulatory passage of the Brihadisvara Temple in India and are the first Chola specimens discovered.\nResearchers have discovered the technique used in these frescos. A smooth batter of limestone mixture was applied over the stones, which took two to three days to set. Within that short span, such large paintings were painted with natural organic pigments.\nDuring the Nayak period, the Chola paintings were painted over. The Chola frescos lying underneath have an ardent spirit of saivism expressed in them. They probably synchronised with the completion of the temple by Rajaraja Cholan the Great.\nThe frescoes in Dogra/ Pahari style paintings exist in their unique form at Sheesh Mahal of Ramnagar (105\u00a0km from Jammu and 35\u00a0km west of Udhampur). Scenes from epics of Mahabharat and Ramayan along with portraits of local lords form the subject matter of these wall paintings. Rang Mahal of Chamba (Himachal Pradesh) is another site of historic Dogri fresco with wall paintings depicting scenes of \"Draupti Cheer Haran\", and \"Radha- Krishna Leela\". This can be seen preserved at National Museum at New Delhi in a chamber called \"Chamba Rang Mahal\".\nDuring the Mughal Era, frescos were used for making interior design on walls and inside the ceilings of domes.\nSri Lanka.\nThe Sigiriya Frescoes are found in Sigiriya in Sri Lanka. Painted during the reign of King Kashyapa I (ruled 477 \u2013 495 AD). The generally accepted view is that they are portrayals of women of the royal court of the king depicted as celestial nymphs showering flowers upon the humans below. They bear some resemblance to the Gupta style of painting found in the Ajanta Caves in India. They are, however, far more enlivened and colorful and uniquely Sri Lankan in character. While some scholars contend that these frescos are the only surviving secular art from antiquity found in Sri Lanka today, others argue that they are Buddhist in nature (potentially representing goddesses from Tusita heaven)\nThe painting technique used on the Sigiriya paintings is \"fresco lustro\". It varies slightly from the pure fresco technique in that it also contains a mild binding agent or glue. This gives the painting added durability, as clearly demonstrated by the fact that they have survived, exposed to the elements, for over 1,500 years.\nLocated in a small sheltered depression a hundred meters above ground only 19 survive today. Ancient references, however, refer to the existence of as many as five hundred of these frescoes.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe late Medieval period and the Renaissance saw the most prominent use of fresco, particularly in Italy, where most churches and many government buildings still feature fresco decoration. This change coincided with the reevaluation of murals in the liturgy. Romanesque churches in Catalonia were richly painted in 12th and 13th century, with both decorative and educational\u2014for the illiterate faithfuls\u2014roles, as can be seen in the MNAC in Barcelona, where is kept a large collection of Catalan romanesque art. In Denmark too, church wall paintings or \"kalkmalerier\" were widely used in the Middle Ages (first Romanesque, then Gothic) and can be seen in some 600 Danish churches as well as in churches in the south of Sweden, which was Danish at the time.\nOne of the rare examples of Islamic fresco painting can be seen in Qasr Amra, the desert palace of the Umayyads in the 8th century Magotez.\nEarly modern Europe.\nFresco painting continued into the Baroque in southern Europe, for churches and especially palaces. Gianbattista Tiepolo was arguably the last major exponent of this tradition, with huge schemes for palaces in Madrid and W\u00fcrzburg in Germany.\nNorthern Romania (historical region of Moldavia) boasts about a dozen painted monasteries, completely covered with frescos inside and out, that date from the last quarter of the 15th century to the second quarter of the 16th century. The most remarkable are the monastic foundations at Vorone\u0163 (1487), Arbore (1503), Humor (1530), and Moldovi\u0163a (1532). Sucevi\u0163a, dating from 1600, represents a late return to the style developed some 70 years earlier. The tradition of painted churches continued into the 19th century in other parts of Romania, although never to the same extent.\nHenri Cl\u00e9ment Serveau produced several frescos including a three by six meter painting for the \"Lyc\u00e9e de Meaux\", where he was once a student. He directed the \"\u00c9cole de fresques\" at , and decorated the \"Pavillon du Tourisme\" at the 1937 (Paris), \"Pavillon de la Ville de Paris\"; now at Mus\u00e9e d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. In 1954 he realized a fresco for the Cit\u00e9 Ouvri\u00e8re du Laboratoire D\u00e9bat, Garches. He also executed mural decorations for the \"Plan des anciennes enceintes de Paris\" in the Mus\u00e9e Carnavalet.\nThe Foujita chapel in Reims completed in 1966, is an example of modern frescos, the interior being painted with religious scenes by the School of Paris painter Tsuguharu Foujita. In 1996, it was designated an historic monument by the French government.\nMexican muralism.\nJos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, Fernando Leal, David Siqueiros and Diego Rivera the famous Mexican artists, renewed the art of fresco painting in the 20th century. Orozco, Siqueiros, Rivera and his wife Frida Kahlo contributed more to the history of Mexican fine arts and to the reputation of Mexican art in general than anybody else. Channeling pre-Columbian Mexican artworks including the true frescoes at Teotihuacan, Orozco, Siqueiros, River and Fernando Leal established the art movement known as \"Mexican Muralism\".\nContemporary.\nThere have been comparatively few frescoes created since the 1960s but there are some significant exceptions.\nThe American artist, Brice Marden's monochrome works first shown in 1966 at Bykert Gallery, New York were inspired by frescos and \"watching masons plastering stucco walls.\" While Marden employed the imagistic effects of fresco, David Novros was developing a 50-year practice around the technique. David Novros is an American painter and a muralist of geometric abstraction. In 1968 Donald Judd commissioned Novros to create a work at 101 Spring Street, New York, NY soon after he had purchased the building. Novros used medieval techniques to create the mural by \"first preparing a full-scale cartoon, which he transferred to the wet plaster using the traditional pouncing technique,\" the act of passing powdered pigment onto the plaster through tiny perforations in a cartoon. The surface unity of the fresco was important to Novros in that the pigment he used bonded with the drying plaster, becoming part of the wall rather than a surface coating. This site-specific work was Novros's first true fresco, which was restored by the artist in 2013.\nThe American painter, James Hyde first presented frescoes in New York at the Esther Rand Gallery, Thompkins Square Park in 1985. At that time Hyde was using true fresco technique on small panels made of cast concrete arranged on the wall. Throughout the next decade Hyde experimented with multiple rigid supports for the fresco plaster including composite board and plate glass. In 1991 at John Good Gallery in New York City, Hyde debuted true fresco applied on an enormous block of Styrofoam. Holland Cotter of the New York Times described the work as \"objectifying some of the individual elements that have made modern paintings paintings.\" While Hyde's work \"ranges from paintings on photographic prints to large-scale installations, photography, and abstract furniture design\" his frescoes on Styrofoam have been a significant form of his work since the 1980s.\nThe frescoes have been shown throughout Europe and the United States. In ArtForum David Pagel wrote, \"like ruins from some future archaeological dig, Hyde's nonrepresentational frescoes on large chunks of Styrofoam give suggestive shape to the fleeting landscape of the present.\" Over its long history, practitioners of frescoes always took a careful methodological approach. Hyde's frescoes are done improvisationally. The contemporary disposability of the Styrofoam structure contrast the permanence of the classical fresco technique. In 1993, Hyde mounted four automobile sized frescoes on Styrofoam suspended from a brick wall. Progressive Insurance commissioned this site-specific work for the monumental 80- foot atrium in their headquarters in Cleveland, Ohio.\nConservation of frescoes.\nThe climate and environment of Venice has proved to be a problem for frescoes and other works of art in the city for centuries. The city is built on a lagoon in northern Italy. The humidity and the rise of water over the centuries have created a phenomenon known as rising damp. As the lagoon water rises and seeps into the foundation of a building, the water is absorbed and rises up through the walls often causing damage to frescoes. Venetians have become quite adept in the conservation methods of frescoes. The mold aspergillus versicolor can grow after flooding, to consume nutrients from frescoes.\nThe following is the process that was used when rescuing frescoes in La Fenice, a Venetian opera house, but the same process can be used for similarly damaged frescoes. First, a protection and support bandage of cotton gauze and polyvinyl alcohol is applied. Difficult sections are removed with soft brushes and localized vacuuming. The other areas that are easier to remove (because they had been damaged by less water) are removed with a paper pulp compress saturated with bicarbonate of ammonia solutions and removed with deionized water. These sections are strengthened and reattached then cleansed with base exchange resin compresses and the wall and pictorial layer were strengthened with barium hydrate. The cracks and detachments are stopped with lime putty and injected with an epoxy resin loaded with micronized silica."}
{"id": "11145", "revid": "18426370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11145", "title": "Fire", "text": "Fire is the rapid oxidation of a fuel in the exothermic chemical process of combustion, releasing heat, light, and various reaction products.\nFlames, the most visible portion of the fire, are produced in the combustion reaction when the fuel reaches its ignition point. Flames from hydrocarbon fuels consist primarily of carbon dioxide, water vapor, oxygen, and nitrogen. If hot enough, the gases may become ionized to produce plasma. The color and intensity of the flame depend on the type of fuel and composition of the surrounding gases.\nFire, in its most common form, has the potential to result in conflagration, which can lead to permanent physical damage. It directly impacts land-based ecological systems worldwide. The positive effects of fire include stimulating plant growth and maintaining ecological balance. Its negative effects include hazards to life and property, atmospheric pollution, and water contamination. When fire removes protective vegetation, heavy rainfall can cause soil erosion. The burning of vegetation releases nitrogen into the atmosphere, unlike other plant nutrients such as potassium and phosphorus which remain in the ash and are quickly recycled into the soil. This loss of nitrogen produces a long-term reduction in the fertility of the soil, though it can be recovered by \"nitrogen-fixing\" plants such as clover, peas, and beans; by decomposition of animal waste and corpses, and by natural phenomena such as lightning.\nFire is one of the four classical elements and has been used by humans in rituals, in agriculture for clearing land, for cooking, generating heat and light, for signaling, propulsion purposes, smelting, forging, incineration of waste, cremation, and as a weapon or mode of destruction. Various technologies and strategies have been devised to prevent, manage, mitigate, and extinguish fires, with professional firefighters playing a leading role.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"fire\" comes from Old English and has cognates in many Germanic languages and other Indo-European languages. The Proto-Germanic nominative form is reconstructed as , descending from Proto-Indo-European . An alternative spelling existed in Middle English: ; still preserved in \"fiery\".\nHistory.\nFossil record.\nThe fossil record of fire first appears with the establishment of a land-based flora in the Middle Ordovician period, , which contributed large amounts of oxygen to the atmosphere, as the new hordes of land plants pumped it out as a waste product. When this concentration rose above 13%, it permitted the possibility of wildfire. Wildfire is first recorded in the Late Silurian fossil record, , by fossils of charred plants. Apart from a controversial gap in the Late Devonian, charcoal is present ever since. The level of atmospheric oxygen is closely correlated with the amount of charcoal in the fossil record, clearly pointing to oxygen as the key factor in the prevalence of wildfire. Fire also became more abundant when grasses became the dominant component of many ecosystems, around , providing excellent tinder for more rapid spread of fire. This widespread emergence of wildfire may have initiated a positive feedback process, whereby they produced a warmer, drier climate more conducive to fire.\nHuman control.\nThe period of history characterized by the influence of human-caused fire activity on Earth has been dubbed the pyrocene. This epoch includes the burning of fossil fuels, especially for technological uses.\nEarly human control.\nThe ability to control fire was a dramatic change in the habits of early humans. Making fire to generate heat and light made it possible for people to cook food, simultaneously increasing the variety and availability of nutrients and reducing disease by killing pathogenic microorganisms in the food. The heat produced would also help people stay warm in cold weather, enabling them to live in cooler climates. Fire also kept nocturnal predators at bay. Evidence of occasional cooked food is found from , suggesting it was used in a controlled fashion. Other sources put the date of regular use at 400,000 years ago. Evidence becomes widespread around 50 to 100 thousand years ago, suggesting regular use from this time; resistance to air pollution started to evolve in human populations at a similar point in time. The use of fire became progressively more sophisticated, as it was used to create charcoal and to control wildlife from tens of thousands of years ago.\nBy the Neolithic Revolution, during the introduction of grain-based agriculture, people all over the world used fire as a tool in landscape management. These fires were typically controlled burns or \"cool fires\", as opposed to uncontrolled \"hot fires\", which damage the soil. Hot fires destroy plants and animals, and endanger communities. This is especially a problem in the forests of today where traditional burning is prevented in order to encourage the growth of timber crops. Cool fires are generally conducted in the spring and autumn. They clear undergrowth, burning up biomass that could trigger a hot fire should it get too dense. They provide a greater variety of environments, which encourages game and plant diversity. For humans, they make dense, impassable forests traversable.\nAnother human use for fire in regards to landscape management is its use to clear land for agriculture. Slash-and-burn agriculture is still common across much of tropical Africa, Asia and South America. For small farmers, controlled fires are a convenient way to clear overgrown areas and release nutrients from standing vegetation back into the soil. However, this useful strategy is also problematic. Growing population, fragmentation of forests and warming climate are making the earth's surface more prone to ever-larger escaped fires. These harm ecosystems and human infrastructure, cause health problems, and send up spirals of carbon and soot that may encourage even more warming of the atmosphere \u2013 and thus feed back into more fires. Globally today, as much as 5 million square kilometres \u2013 an area more than half the size of the United States \u2013 burns in a given year.\nLater human control.\nThroughout much of history, cultures attempted to explain nature and the properties of matter by proposing a set of four (or five) classical elements, of which fire formed one of the components. As scientific understanding developed following the Middle Ages, this philosophy was replaced by a set of chemical elements and their interactions. Instead, the classical elements found an equivalency in the states of matter: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.\nDuring the 17th century, a study of combustion was made by Jan Baptist van Helmont who discovered that burning charcoal released a \"gas sylvestris\", or wild spirit. This was subsequently incorporated into Phlogiston theory by Johann Joachim Becher in 1667; a concept that would dominate alchemical thinking for nearly two centuries. It was Antoine Lavoisier who demonstrated that combustion did not involve the release of a substance, but rather something was being taken up. In 1777, Lavoisier proposed a new theory of combustion based on the reaction of a material with a component of air, which he termed oxyg\u00e8ne. By 1791, Lavoisier's chemistry concepts had been widely adopted by young scientists, and Phlogiston theory was rejected.\nFire has been used for centuries as a method of torture and execution, as evidenced by death by burning as well as torture devices such as the iron boot, which could be heated over an open fire to the agony of the wearer.\nThere are numerous modern applications of fire. In its broadest sense, fire is used by nearly every human being on Earth in a controlled setting every day. Users of internal combustion vehicles employ fire every time they drive. Thermal power stations provide electricity for a large percentage of humanity by igniting fuels such as coal, oil or natural gas, then using the resultant heat to boil water into steam, which then drives turbines.\nUse in war.\nThe use of fire in warfare has a long history. Fire was the basis of all early thermal weapons, including incendiary devices, heated projectiles, and the use of smoke. This class of weapons was particularly evident during naval battles and siege warfare. The Byzantine fleet used Greek fire to attack ships and men.\nThe invention of gunpowder in China led to the fire lance, a flame-thrower weapon dating to around 1000 CE which was a precursor to projectile weapons driven by burning gunpowder. The earliest modern flamethrowers were used by infantry in the First World War, first used by German troops against entrenched French troops near Verdun in February 1915. They were later successfully mounted on armoured vehicles in the Second World War.\nHand-thrown incendiary bombs improvised from glass bottles, later known as Molotov cocktails, were deployed during the Spanish Civil War in the 1930s. During that war, incendiary bombs were deployed against Guernica by Fascist Italian and Nazi German air forces that had been created specifically to support Franco's Nationalists.\nIncendiary bombs were dropped by Axis and Allies during the Second World War, notably on Coventry, Tokyo, Rotterdam, London, Hamburg and Dresden. In the latter two cases, firestorms were deliberately caused in which a ring of fire surrounding each city was drawn inward by an updraft created by a central cluster of fires. The United States Army Air Force extensively used incendiaries against Japanese targets in the latter months of the war, devastating entire cities constructed primarily of wood and paper houses. The incendiary fluid napalm was used in July 1944, towards the end of the Second World War, although its use did not gain public attention until the Vietnam War.\nProductive use for energy.\nBurning fuel converts chemical energy into heat energy; wood has been used as fuel since prehistory. The International Energy Agency states that nearly 80% of the world's power has consistently come from fossil fuels such as petroleum, natural gas, and coal in the past decades. The fire in a power station is used to heat water, creating steam that drives turbines. The turbines then spin an electric generator to produce electricity. Fire is also used to provide mechanical work directly by thermal expansion, in both external and internal combustion engines.\nThe unburnable solid remains of a combustible material left after a fire is called \"clinker\" if its melting point is below the flame temperature, so that it fuses and then solidifies as it cools, and \"ash\" if its melting point is above the flame temperature.\nPhysical properties.\nChemistry.\nFire is a chemical process in which a fuel and an oxidizing agent react, yielding carbon dioxide and water. This process, known as a combustion reaction, does not proceed directly and involves intermediates. Although the oxidizing agent is typically oxygen, other compounds are able to fulfill the role. For instance, chlorine trifluoride is able to ignite sand.\nFires start when a flammable or a combustible material, in combination with a sufficient quantity of an oxidizer such as oxygen gas or another oxygen-rich compound (though non-oxygen oxidizers exist, such as chlorine), is exposed to a source of heat or ambient temperature above the flash point for the fuel/oxidizer mix, and is able to sustain a rate of rapid oxidation that produces a chain reaction. This is commonly called the fire tetrahedron. Fire cannot exist without all of these elements in place and in the right proportions. For example, a flammable liquid will start burning only if the fuel and oxygen are in the right proportions. Some fuel-oxygen mixes may require a catalyst, a substance that is not consumed, when added, in any chemical reaction during combustion, but which enables the reactants to combust more readily.\nOnce ignited, a chain reaction must take place whereby fires can sustain their own heat by the further release of heat energy in the process of combustion and may propagate, provided there is a continuous supply of an oxidizer and fuel. If the oxidizer is oxygen from the surrounding air, the presence of a force of gravity, or of some similar force caused by acceleration, is necessary to produce convection, which removes combustion products and brings a supply of oxygen to the fire. Without gravity, a fire rapidly surrounds itself with its own combustion products and non-oxidizing gases from the air, which exclude oxygen and extinguish the fire. Because of this, the risk of fire in a spacecraft is small when it is coasting in inertial flight. This does not apply if oxygen is supplied to the fire by some process other than thermal convection.\nFire can be extinguished by removing any one of the elements of the fire tetrahedron. Consider a natural gas flame, such as from a stove-top burner. The fire can be extinguished by any of the following:\nIn contrast, fire is intensified by increasing the overall rate of combustion. Methods to do this include balancing the input of fuel and oxidizer to stoichiometric proportions, increasing fuel and oxidizer input in this balanced mix, increasing the ambient temperature so the fire's own heat is better able to sustain combustion, or providing a catalyst, a non-reactant medium in which the fuel and oxidizer can more readily react.\nFlame.\nA diffusion flame is a mixture of reacting gases and solids emitting visible, infrared, and sometimes ultraviolet light, the frequency spectrum of which depends on the chemical composition of the burning material and intermediate reaction products. During the burning of hydrocarbons, for example wood, or the incomplete combustion of gas, incandescent solid particles called soot produce the familiar red-orange glow of \"fire\". This light has a continuous spectrum. Complete combustion of gas has a dim blue color due to the emission of single-wavelength radiation from various electron transitions in the excited molecules formed in the flame.\nUsually oxygen is involved, but hydrogen burning in chlorine also produces a flame, producing hydrogen chloride (HCl). Other possible combinations producing flames, amongst many, are fluorine with hydrogen, and hydrazine with dinitrogen tetroxide. Hydrogen and hydrazine/UDMH flames are similarly pale blue, while burning boron and its compounds, evaluated in mid-20th century as a high energy fuel for jet and rocket engines, emits intense green flame, leading to its informal nickname of \"Green Dragon\".\nThe glow of a flame is complex. Black-body radiation is emitted from soot, gas, and fuel particles, though the soot particles are too small to behave like perfect blackbodies. There is also photon emission by de-excited atoms and molecules in the gases. Much of the radiation is emitted in the visible and infrared bands. The color depends on temperature for the black-body radiation, and on chemical makeup for the emission spectra.\nThe common distribution of a flame under normal gravity conditions depends on convection, as soot tends to rise to the top of a general flame, as in a candle in normal gravity conditions, making it yellow. In microgravity or zero gravity, such as an environment in outer space, convection no longer occurs, and the flame becomes spherical, with a tendency to become more blue and more efficient (although it may go out if not moved steadily, as the CO2 from combustion does not disperse as readily in microgravity, and tends to smother the flame). There are several possible explanations for this difference, of which the most likely is that the temperature is sufficiently evenly distributed that soot is not formed and complete combustion occurs.\nExperiments by NASA reveal that diffusion flames in microgravity allow more soot to be completely oxidized after they are produced than diffusion flames on Earth, because of a series of mechanisms that behave differently in micro gravity when compared to normal gravity conditions. These discoveries have potential applications in applied science and industry, especially concerning fuel efficiency.\nTypical adiabatic temperatures.\nThe adiabatic flame temperature of a given fuel and oxidizer pair is that at which the gases achieve stable combustion.\nFire science.\nFire science is a branch of physical science which includes fire behavior, dynamics, and combustion. Applications of fire science include fire protection, fire investigation, and wildfire management.\nEcology.\nEvery natural ecosystem on land has its own fire regime, and the organisms in those ecosystems are adapted to or dependent upon that fire regime. Fire creates a mosaic of different habitat patches, each at a different stage of succession. Different species of plants, animals, and microbes specialize in exploiting a particular stage, and by creating these different types of patches, fire allows a greater number of species to exist within a landscape.\nFirefighting.\nFire fighting services are provided in most developed areas to extinguish or contain uncontrolled fires. Trained firefighters use fire apparatus, water supply resources such as water mains and fire hydrants or they might use A and B class foam depending on what is feeding the fire.\nThe early detection of a wildfire outbreak can be performed by a fire lookout observing from a tower constructed for that purpose. The use of these towers peaked in 1938 and has been in decline since that time; most of the fire surveillance work is now performed using infrared sensors and aircraft. Fire suppression aircraft guided by a lookout can be used to help manage wildfires. These are primarily used in support of ground crews\nManagement, prevention and protection systems.\nControlling a fire to optimize its size, shape, and intensity is generally called \"fire management\", and the more advanced forms of it, as traditionally (and sometimes still) practiced by skilled cooks, blacksmiths, ironmasters, and others, are highly skilled activities. They include knowledge of which fuel to burn; how to arrange the fuel; how to stoke the fire both in early phases and in maintenance phases; how to modulate the heat, flame, and smoke as suited to the desired application; how best to bank a fire to be revived later; how to choose, design, or modify stoves, fireplaces, bakery ovens, or industrial furnaces; and so on. Detailed expositions of fire management are available in various books about blacksmithing, about skilled camping or military scouting, and about domestic arts.\nWildfire prevention programs around the world may employ techniques such as \"wildland fire use\" and \"prescribed or controlled burns\". \"Wildland fire use\" refers to any fire of natural causes that is monitored but allowed to burn. \"Controlled burns\" are fires ignited by government agencies under less dangerous weather conditions.\nFire prevention is intended to reduce sources of ignition. Fire prevention also includes education to teach people how to avoid causing fires. Buildings, especially schools and tall buildings, often conduct fire drills to inform and prepare citizens on how to react to a building fire. Purposely starting destructive fires constitutes arson and is a crime in most jurisdictions.\nModel building codes require passive fire protection and active fire protection systems to minimize damage resulting from a fire. A common form of active fire protection is fire sprinklers. To maximize passive fire protection of buildings, building materials and furnishings in most developed countries are tested for fire-resistance, combustibility and flammability. Upholstery, carpeting and plastics used in vehicles and vessels are also tested.\nWhere fire prevention and fire protection have failed to prevent damage, fire insurance can mitigate the financial impact.\nIn culture.\nFire has been an importance element of human culture since the Lower Paleolithic. Archaeological evidence demonstrates that fire worship has been widely practiced since prehistory, with dedicated structures found dating from at least the Chalcolithic period. Zoroastrianism originated from this practice. In some societies fire was a deity, while others viewed it as the manifestation of the divine. The fire in a hearth was perceived as symbolic of the Heavenly Fire, and thus is considered a sacred component by fire worshipping cultures. The origin of fire became a subject of mythology. In ancient Greek culture, the Titan\u2013god Prometheus was responsible for stealing heavenly fire and gifting it to humanity.\nThe use of a pyre as a funerary practice dates back to at least the Ancient Roman period. Cremation of corpses is a tradition long practiced in some cultures, including Hindu. After early religious resistance in some countries, in the 19th century this practice became more widespread and is now commonplace. In some nations, suicide by self-immolation remains common.\nThe symbology of fire remains important to the present day. Where wood is plentiful, the bonfire can be used for celebration purposes, in many cases as part of a tradition. An example is Guy Fawkes Night in England. The barbecue is a fire-based cultural tradition in the United States. The fiery ignition of fireworks has become a modern tradition to celebrate the New Years arrival. In contrast, book burning has been used as a form of protest, whether for political, religious, or moral reasons. The act of \"burning in effigy\" has a similar role, as in the annual burning of Judas ritual.\nHumans lack an instinctual fascination with fire, yet in modern societies adults can become drawn to it out of curiosity. In societies that are dependent on daily fire use, children lose interest in fire at about age seven due to regular exposure. Arson is the act of intentionally setting fire to a property. A separate but related behavior is pyromania, which is classified as an impulse-control disorder where individuals repeatedly fail to resist impulses to deliberately start fires. In contrast is pyrophobia, an irrational fear of fire. This anxiety disorder is a less common phobia."}
{"id": "11146", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11146", "title": "FIDE", "text": "The International Chess Federation or World Chess Federation, commonly referred to by its French acronym FIDE ( , ), is an international organization based in Switzerland that connects the various national chess federations and acts as the governing body of international chess competition. FIDE was founded in Paris, France, in 1924. Its motto is , Latin for 'We are one Family'. In 1999, FIDE was recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC). there are 201 member federations of FIDE. The current world chess champion is Gukesh Dommaraju.\nRole.\nFIDE's most visible activity is organizing the World Chess Championship since 1948. FIDE also organizes world championships for women, juniors, seniors, and the disabled, as well the world championships for the shorter time formats rapid and blitz. Another flagship event is the Chess Olympiad, a biennial chess tournament organized since 1924, in which national teams compete. In alternate years, FIDE also organizes the World Team Championship, in which the best teams from the previous Olympiad compete.\nAs part of the World Chess Championship cycle, FIDE also organizes the Candidates Tournament, which determines who will challenge the reigning World Champion, and the qualifying tournaments for the Candidates, such as the Chess World Cup, the FIDE Grand Prix, and the FIDE Grand Swiss Tournament 2019.\nFIDE is recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) as the supreme body responsible for the organization of chess and its championships at global and continental levels. Other tournaments are not overseen directly by FIDE, but they generally observe FIDE rules and regulations. Some national chess organizations such as the US Chess Federation use minor differences to FIDE rules.\nFIDE defines the rules of chess, both for individual games (i.e. the board and moves) and for the conduct of international competitions. The international competition rules are the basis for local competitions, although local bodies are allowed to modify these rules to a certain extent. FIDE awards a number of organizational titles, including International Arbiter, which signifies that the recipient is competent and trusted to oversee top-class competitions.\nFIDE calculates the Elo ratings of players and awards titles for achievement in competitive play, such as the Grandmaster title. It also awards titles to composers and solvers of chess problems and studies.\nFIDE funds and manages outreach programs, such as the Chess for Freedom program and awards such as, since 2020, the Svetozar Gligoric Award for fair play.\nCorrespondence chess (chess played by post, email or on online servers) is regulated by the International Correspondence Chess Federation, an independent body that cooperates with FIDE where appropriate.\nThe FIDE budget for 2022 was , an increase from the 2021 budget which was . Income is primarily from rights to tournaments such as the Olympiad and World Championship, from various fees and commissions, and from corporate sponsorship and donations.\nRegions.\nRegions of FIDE are as follows:\nHistory.\nFoundation and early years (up to 1939).\nIn 1904, L'union Amicale, a French chess association, attempted to establish an international chess federation. In April 1914, an initiative was taken in St. Petersburg, Russia, to form an international chess federation. Another attempt was made in July 1914 during the Mannheim International Chess Tournament. Further efforts temporarily came to an end as a result of the outbreak of World War I. In 1920, another attempt to organize an international federation was made at the Gothenburg Tournament.\nPlayers made the first attempt to produce rules for world championship matches\u2014in 1922, world champion Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca proposed the \"London rules\": the first player to win six games outright would win the match; playing sessions would be limited to five hours; the time limit would be 40 moves in 2.5 hours each; the champion would be obliged to defend his title within one year of receiving a challenge from a recognized master; the champion would decide the date of the match; the champion was not obliged to accept a challenge for a purse of less than $10,000 (); 20% of the purse was to be paid to the title holder, with the remainder being divided, 60 percent to the winner of the match, and 40% to the loser; the highest purse bid must be accepted. Alekhine, Bogoljubov, Mar\u00f3czy, R\u00e9ti, Rubinstein, Tartakower and Vidmar promptly signed them. The only match played under those rules was Capablanca vs Alekhine in 1927.\nIn 1922, the Russian master Eugene Znosko-Borovsky, while participating in an international tournament in London, announced that a tournament would be held during the 8th Sports Olympic Games in Paris in 1924 and would be hosted by the French Chess Federation. On July 20, 1924, the participants at the Paris tournament founded FIDE as a kind of players' union. In its early years, FIDE had little power, and it was poorly financed.\nFIDE's congresses in 1925 and 1926 expressed a desire to become involved in managing the world championship. FIDE was largely happy with the \"London Rules\", but claimed that the requirement for a purse of $10,000 was impracticable and called upon Capablanca to come to an agreement with the leading masters to revise the Rules.\nFIDE's third congress, in Budapest in 1926, also decided to organize a Chess Olympiad. The invitations were, however, late in being sent, with the result that only four countries participated, and the competition was called the Little Olympiad. The winner was Hungary, followed by Yugoslavia, Romania, and Germany. In 1927, FIDE began organizing the First Chess Olympiad during its 4th Congress in London. The official title of the tournament was the \"Tournament of Nations\", or \"World Team Championship\", but \"Chess Olympiad\" became a more popular title. The event was won by Hungary, with 16 teams competing.\nIn 1928, FIDE recognized Bogoljubow as \"Champion of FIDE\" after he won a match against Max Euwe. Alekhine, the reigning world champion, attended part of the 1928 Congress and agreed to place future matches for the world title under the auspices of FIDE, although any match with Capablanca should be under the same conditions as in Buenos Aires, 1927, i.e., including the requirement for a purse of at least $10,000. FIDE accepted this and decided to form a commission to modify the London Rules for future matches, though this commission never met; by the time of the 1929 Congress, a world championship match between Alekhine and Bogoljubow was under way, held neither under the auspices of FIDE nor in accordance with the London Rules.\nWhile negotiating his 1937 World Championship re-match with Alekhine, Euwe proposed that if he retained the title, FIDE should manage the nomination of future challengers and the conduct of championship matches. FIDE had been trying since 1935 to introduce rules on how to select challengers, and its various proposals favored selection by some sort of committee. While they were debating procedures in 1937 and Alekhine and Euwe were preparing for their re-match later that year, the Dutch Chess Federation proposed that a super-tournament (AVRO) of ex-champions and rising stars should be held to select the next challenger. FIDE rejected this proposal and at their second attempt nominated Salo Flohr as the official challenger. Euwe then declared that: if he retained his title against Alekhine he was prepared to meet Flohr in 1940 but he reserved the right to arrange a title match either in 1938 or 1939 with Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca, who had lost the title to Alekhine in 1927; if Euwe lost his title to Capablanca then FIDE's decision should be followed and Capablanca would have to play Flohr in 1940. Most chess writers and players strongly supported the Dutch super-tournament proposal and opposed the committee processes favored by FIDE. While this confusion went unresolved: Euwe lost his title to Alekhine; the AVRO tournament in 1938 was won by Paul Keres under a tie-breaking rule, with Reuben Fine placed second and Capablanca and Flohr in the bottom places; and the outbreak of World War II in 1939 cut short the controversy. Although competitive chess continued in many countries, including some that were under Nazi occupation, there was no international competition and FIDE was inactive during the war.\n1946 to 1993.\nBirth of the World Championship challenge cycle.\nFrom the time of Emanuel Lasker's defeat of Wilhelm Steinitz in 1894, until 1946, a new World Champion had won the title by defeating the former champion in a match. Alexander Alekhine's death created an \"interregnum\" that made the normal procedure impossible. The situation was confused, with many respected players and commentators offering different solutions. FIDE found it difficult to organize the early discussions on how to resolve the \"interregnum\", because problems with money and travel in the aftermath of World War II prevented many countries from sending representatives, most notably the Soviet Union. The shortage of clear information resulted in otherwise responsible magazines publishing rumors and speculation, which only made the situation more confused. See Interregnum of World Chess Champions for more details.\nThis situation was exacerbated by the Soviet Union having long refused to join FIDE, and by this time it was clear that about half the credible contenders were Soviet citizens. The Soviet Union realized, however, it could not afford to be left out of the discussions regarding the vacant world championship, and in 1947 sent a telegram apologizing for the absence of Soviet representatives and requesting that the USSR be represented in future FIDE Committees.\nThe eventual solution was similar to FIDE's initial proposal and to a proposal put forward by the Soviet Union (authored by Mikhail Botvinnik). The 1938 AVRO tournament was used as the basis for the 1948 Championship Tournament. The AVRO tournament had brought together the eight players who were, by general acclamation, the best players in the world at the time. Two of the participants at AVRO\u2014Alekhine and former world champion Capablanca\u2014had since died; but FIDE decided that the other six participants at AVRO would play a quadruple round-robin tournament. These players were: Max Euwe (from The Netherlands); Botvinnik, Paul Keres and Salo Flohr (from the Soviet Union); and Reuben Fine and Samuel Reshevsky (from the United States). FIDE soon accepted a Soviet request to substitute Vasily Smyslov for Flohr, and Fine withdrew in order to continue his degree studies in psychiatry, so five players competed, in a quintuple round robin. Botvinnik won, thus becoming world champion, ending the \"interregnum\".\nThe proposals which led to the 1948 Championship Tournament also specified the procedure by which challengers for the World Championship would be selected in a three-year cycle: countries affiliated with FIDE would send players to Zonal tournaments (the number varied depending on the number of strong players each country had); the players who gained the top places in these would compete in an Interzonal tournament (later split into two, then three tournaments as the number of countries and eligible players increased); the highest-placed players from the Interzonal would compete in the Candidates Tournament, along with the loser of the previous title match and the runner-up in the previous Candidates Tournament; and the winner of the Candidates played a title match against the champion. From 1950 until 1962 inclusive, the Candidates Tournament was a multi-round round-robin\u2014how and why it was changed are described below.\nBobby Fischer controversies.\nFIDE found itself embroiled in some controversies relating to the American player Bobby Fischer. The first controversy took place when Fischer alleged that, at the 1962 Candidates Tournament in Cura\u00e7ao, the Soviet players Tigran Petrosian, Paul Keres and Efim Geller had pre-arranged draws in their games played amongst themselves, and that Viktor Korchnoi, another Soviet player, had been instructed to lose to them (Fischer had placed 4th, well behind Petrosian, Keres and Geller). Grandmaster Yuri Averbakh, a member of the Soviet delegation at the tournament, confirmed in 2002 that Petrosian, Keres and Geller privately agreed to draw their games. FIDE responded by changing the format of Candidates Tournaments from a multi-round round-robin to a series of elimination matches, initially 10\u201312 games in duration; however, by the 1970s, the Candidates final would be as long as 24 games.\nThen, in 1969, Fischer refused to play in the U.S. Championship because of disagreements about the tournament's format and prize fund. Since that event was being treated as a Zonal tournament, Fischer forfeited his right to compete for the right to challenge World Champion Boris Spassky in 1972. Grandmaster Pal Benko agreed to relinquish his qualifying place at the Interzonal in Fischer's favor, and the other participants waived their right to claim the spot. FIDE president Max Euwe interpreted the rules very flexibly to allow Fischer to play in the 1970 Interzonal at Palma de Mallorca, which he won convincingly. Fischer then crushed Mark Taimanov, Bent Larsen (both 6\u20130) and Tigran Petrosian in the 1971 Candidates\nTournament and won the title match with Spassky to become world champion.\nAfter winning the world championship, Fischer criticized the existing championship match format (24 games; the champion retained the title if the match was tied) on the grounds that it encouraged whoever got an early lead to play for draws. While this dispute was going on, Anatoly Karpov won the right to challenge in 1975. Fischer refused to accept any match format other than the one he proposed. Among Fischer's demands was a requirement that the challenger must beat him by at least two games in order to take his title (Fischer proposed a match format in which the first player to win 10 games wins, with draws not counting, but if the result is 9\u20139 it is considered a tie). The FIDE argued that it was unfair for a challenger to be able to beat the world champion, yet not take his title. Fischer would not back down, and eventually FIDE awarded the title to Karpov by default. Some commentators have questioned whether FIDE president Max Euwe did as much as he could have to prevent Fischer from forfeiting his world title.\nOther 1970s controversies.\nFIDE had a number of conflicts with the Soviet Chess Federation. These conflicts included:\nRapid expansion of membership.\nDuring his period as president of FIDE (1970\u20131978) Max Euwe strove to increase the number of member countries, and Florencio Campomanes (president 1982\u20131995) continued this policy, with each member nation receiving one vote. Former world champion Anatoly Karpov later said this was a mixed blessing, as the inclusion of so many small, poor countries led to a \"leadership vacuum at the head of the world of chess...\" Yuri Averbakh said the presence of so many weak countries made it easy to manipulate decisions.\nWorld Championship, 1983\u20131985.\nThe events leading to Garry Kasparov's winning the world championship involved FIDE in two controversies. While arranging the Candidates Tournament semi-final matches to be played in 1983, FIDE accepted bids to host Kasparov versus Victor Korchnoi in Pasadena, California. The Soviet Union refused to accept this, either because it feared Kasparov would defect or because it thought Kasparov was the greater threat to reigning champion Anatoly Karpov. Their refusal would have meant that Kasparov forfeited his chance of challenging for the title. FIDE president Florencio Campomanes negotiated with the Soviet Union, and the match was played in London.\nIn the 1984 world championship match between Karpov and Kasparov the winner was to be the first to win six games. In the first 27 games Karpov gained a 5\u20130 lead but by the end of the 48th Kasparov had reduced this to 5\u20133. At this point the match had lasted for 159 days (from September 1984 to February 1985). Then the match was ended without result by Florencio Campomanes, the President of the World Chess Federation, and a new match was announced to start a few months later. The termination was controversial, as both players stated that they preferred the match to continue. Announcing his decision at a press conference, Campomanes cited the health of the players, which had been strained by the length of the match. Kasparov won the second match and became world champion.\n1993 to 2018.\nWorld Championship divided, 1993\u20132006.\nIn 1992, Nigel Short emerged as the official challenger for Kasparov's world title after winning the Candidates Tournament. FIDE promptly accepted a bid from Manchester, England, to host the 1993 title match, but without consulting Short, as its rules required; Short was traveling to Greece at the time. Upon learning of this, Short reached out to Kasparov, who had harbored distrust for FIDE and its president, Florencio Campomanes, since the abrupt end of his 1984 title match against Anatoly Karpov. Kasparov and Short concluded that FIDE had not secured the best financial deal for them and announced their decision to play under a new organization, the Professional Chess Association (PCA). In response, FIDE stripped Kasparov of his title, removed both Kasparov and Short from the official rating list, and announced a title match between Karpov and Jan Timman, whom Short had defeated in the Candidates Tournament. Both Kasparov and Karpov won their respective matches, both claiming the title of world champion.\nBy 1994, Kasparov realized that separating from FIDE had been a mistake, as the split in the world championship was unpopular among commercial sponsors and most grandmasters. He began efforts to mend relations with FIDE and supported Campomanes's re-election bid as FIDE president. However, many FIDE delegates viewed Campomanes as corrupt, and he agreed to resign in 1995, provided his successor was Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, the president of the Republic of Kalmykia.\nSeveral attempts to reunify the world championship in the following years failed for various reasons, including financial constraints and Kasparov's opposition to any plan requiring him to play in a qualifying series. In 2000, Vladimir Kramnik defeated Kasparov in a match for the now-renamed Braingames World Chess Championship, as the PCA had dissolved by then. Kramnik, like Kasparov, was unwilling to play in a qualifying series and strongly objected to FIDE's attempt to decide the world championship through annual knockout tournaments and to shorten game time limits.\nIn 2006, a reunification match was held between Kramnik and Veselin Topalov, which Kramnik won amidst a controversy that resulted in one game being awarded to Topalov. However, the split in the world title had lingering effects, as evidenced by FIDE's complex regulations for the 2007-2009 world championship cycle. FIDE decided to grant Topalov a \"fast track\" entry into the 2007-2009 cycle due to his inability to compete in the 2007 World Chess Championship Tournament. Additionally, FIDE decided that if Kramnik did not win the 2007 championship tournament, he would play a championship match in 2008 against the winner. This provision came into effect when Viswanathan Anand won the tournament and became the world champion.\nIOC recognition.\nIn 1999, FIDE was recognised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC). Two years later, it introduced the IOC's anti-drugs rules to chess, as part of its campaign for chess to become part of the Olympic Games.\nCommercial agreement with Agon and World Chess.\nIn 2012 FIDE entered into a commercial agreement, initially planned to last until 2021, with the company Agon Limited. This company was given rights to organize and commercially exploit the World Chess Championship and the associated events in the World Championship cycle. The first tournament it organized was the London FIDE Grand Prix event in September 2012, followed by the London Candidates Tournament in March 2013, and the Chennai World Chess Championship in November 2013.\nAgon subsequently organized the four events in the FIDE Grand Prix 2014\u201315, the Candidates Tournament in 2014, and the World Chess Championship in 2014.\nAgon had been founded in 2012 in Jersey by Andrew Paulson as the sole shareholder. On February 20, 2012, an agreement between Agon and FIDE was made, subject to approval by the 2012 FIDE General Assembly. This approval was forthcoming in September 2012. In October 2014, Agon was sold to its current CEO Ilya Merenzon for the sum of one pound. At the September 2016 FIDE General Assembly, it was resolved that Agon should institute a corporate presence in a locale with more transparency. Merenzon said that they would register in the United Kingdom within a few months. As a result, a new company, World Chess Limited, was registered shortly after, replacing Agon as the rights holder in the agreement with FIDE.\nFIDE and Agon/World Chess contract controversy.\nKirsan Ilyumzhinov was happy with the agreement on the basis that now FIDE itself did not have to expend resources to find organizers for its premier events. The issue of financial guarantees was also important, though as explained below, these have not always materialized. His estimation of 10\u201312 million euros to FIDE from the coming cycles has not yet come to fruition either.\nThe condition that Agon would be the sole organizer of Championship events was disputed originally by principally the Bulgarian Chess Federation, with respect to the Candidates matches for 2012. In early 2014, a purported agreement between Paulson and FIDE President Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was leaked, and then published by Chess.com (and others), which allegedly indicated that Paulson was simply a front man with Ilyumzhinov the ultimate benefactor of Agon. In that Chess.com article Malcolm Pein is quoted as having twice been told by Paulson that Ilyuzmhinov owned Agon, and in a \"New In Chess\" article Nigel Short asserted he had also been told this personally by Paulson. In response, FIDE's deputy vice president Georgios Makropoulos pointed out that the purported contract was a draft document. The FIDE Ethics Commission ruled in September 2015 that Ilyumzhinov did not violate the FIDE Code of Ethics.\n2018 to present.\nThe election of Arkady Dvorkovich and the end of the Ilyumzhinov era.\nIn July 2018, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was ousted as FIDE President, after having been in office for 23 years, since 1995. Being subjected to US sanctions for his business dealings with the Syrian government, Ilyumzhinov was forced out and did not run for re-election in the 2018 FIDE elections. The Greek Georgios Makropoulos, who had been General Secretary since 1990 and number two in the organization under Kirsan's presidency, was the first to announce his ticket. He was followed by the Englishman Nigel Short, a world title contender in the World Chess Championship 1993 against Garry Kasparov. The last to announce his candidacy was Arkady Dvorkovich, an economist who had served as Russian deputy prime minister and was also a member of the supervisory board of the Russian Chess Federation. Dvorkovich was also one of the chief organizers of the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Dvorkovich was placed in the US Treasury pre-sanctions list in 2018 as a top Russian government employee.\nIn the elections, held in Batumi (Georgia) in October 2018, Dvorkovich won by 103 votes to 78 against Makropoulos, after Nigel Short withdrew his candidacy at the last minute and expressed his support to the Russian candidate.\nAfter the 2018 FIDE elections and the appointment of a new FIDE President, the new management took regaining control over the World Championship cycle as one of their top priorities. In January 2019, FIDE Director-General Emil Sutovsky announced that a new contract has been signed that continues a scaled-back relationship with World Chess (formerly known as AGON) through 2021. In virtue of this new agreement, FIDE reasserted control over the 2020 Candidates and the World Championship match, which from now on will undergo an open bidding procedure. Agon/World Chess only retained organizational and commercial rights over the FIDE Grand Prix Series, limited until 2021.\nAt FIDE's general assembly in Chennai, India, in August 2022 Dvorkovich got re-elected by 157 votes to 16 against Ukraine's Andrii Baryshpolets.\nReactions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nOn February 27, 2022, FIDE issued an official statement condemning the Russian invasion of Ukraine. As a consequence, Russia and Belarus were forbidden from hosting official FIDE events. The decision to hold the 2022 Chess Olympiad and the 2022 FIDE congress in Moscow was also revoked. The Russian and Belarusian national teams were banned from participating in FIDE tournaments, although individual players could compete if they complied with strict regulations, in which case their federation and flag was replaced with FIDE and its banner.\nOn March 22, 2022, FIDE decided to issue a six-month ban from competing in rated tournaments against Russian grandmaster Sergey Karjakin. Karjakin had posted controversial statements on Twitter in which he declared his support for the invasion of Ukraine and for President Vladimir Putin's characterization of the war as a fight against Nazism. FIDE argued that Karjakin's statements had shed a negative light on chess and on the federation and found that he had violated the FIDE code of ethics. Sergei Shipov, who also publicly commented in favor of Russia, was not sanctioned, because FIDE decided that his statements were less provocative.\nPolicy on transgender players.\nIn August 2023, FIDE ruled that transgender women would be excluded from women's tournaments organised by them, such as the Women's World Chess Championship, the Women's Chess World Cup, and qualification events for these. Additionally, they implemented rules stripping transgender men of any women's titles they might have earned while competing as women. The regulation affects those who changed their gender identity after being assigned a FIDE identification number.\nThe French Chess Federation announced that they would not implement any restrictions on transgender players, considering the FIDE decision transphobic. A little later, the German Chess Federation said in a statement that they do not exclude transgender women from women's tournaments, and made reference to Annemarie Sylvia Meier, a transgender woman who won the 2003 German Women's Chess Championship. They also said that no one should have to experience violence and discrimination. Similar statements were also released by the English, Finnish and US chess federations.\nSince the announcement, French transgender player Yosha Iglesias has competed as a woman and been awarded the Woman International Master title."}
{"id": "11148", "revid": "159495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11148", "title": "Fresnel equatations", "text": ""}
{"id": "11149", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11149", "title": "Fresnel equations", "text": "The Fresnel equations (or Fresnel coefficients) describe the reflection and transmission of light (or electromagnetic radiation in general) when incident on an interface between different optical media. They were deduced by French engineer and physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel () who was the first to understand that light is a transverse wave, when no one realized that the waves were electric and magnetic fields. For the first time, polarization could be understood quantitatively, as Fresnel's equations correctly predicted the differing behaviour of waves of the \"s\" and \"p\" polarizations incident upon a material interface.\nOverview.\nWhen light strikes the interface between a medium with refractive index and a second medium with refractive index , both reflection and refraction of the light may occur. The Fresnel equations give the ratio of the \"reflected\" wave's electric field to the incident wave's electric field, and the ratio of the \"transmitted\" wave's electric field to the incident wave's electric field, for each of two components of polarization. (The \"magnetic\" fields can also be related using similar coefficients.) These ratios are generally complex, describing not only the relative amplitudes but also the phase shifts at the interface.\nThe equations assume the interface between the media is flat and that the media are homogeneous and isotropic. The incident light is assumed to be a plane wave, which is sufficient to solve any problem since any incident light field can be decomposed into plane waves and polarizations.\nS and P polarizations.\nThere are two sets of Fresnel coefficients for two different linear polarization components of the incident wave. Since any polarization state can be resolved into a combination of two orthogonal linear polarizations, this is sufficient for any problem. Likewise, unpolarized (or \"randomly polarized\") light has an equal amount of power in each of two linear polarizations.\nThe s polarization refers to polarization of a wave's electric field \"normal\" to the plane of incidence (the direction in the derivation below); then the magnetic field is \"in\" the plane of incidence. The p polarization refers to polarization of the electric field \"in\" the plane of incidence (the plane in the derivation below); then the magnetic field is \"normal\" to the plane of incidence. The names \"s\" and \"p\" for the polarization components refer to German \"senkrecht\" (perpendicular or normal) and \"parallel\" (parallel to the plane of incidence).\nAlthough the reflection and transmission are dependent on polarization, at normal incidence () there is no distinction between them so all polarization states are governed by a single set of Fresnel coefficients (and another special case is mentioned below in which that is true).\nConfiguration.\nIn the diagram on the right, an incident plane wave in the direction of the ray strikes the interface between two media of refractive indices and at point . Part of the wave is reflected in the direction , and part refracted in the direction . The angles that the incident, reflected and refracted rays make to the normal of the interface are given as , and , respectively.\nThe relationship between these angles is given by the law of reflection:\nformula_1\nand Snell's law:\nformula_2\nThe behavior of light striking the interface is explained by considering the electric and magnetic fields that constitute an electromagnetic wave, and the laws of electromagnetism, as shown below. The ratio of waves' electric field (or magnetic field) amplitudes are obtained, but in practice one is more often interested in formulae which determine \"power\" coefficients, since power (or irradiance) is what can be directly measured at optical frequencies. The power of a wave is generally proportional to the square of the electric (or magnetic) field amplitude.\nPower (intensity) reflection and transmission coefficients.\nWe call the fraction of the incident power that is reflected from the interface the \"reflectance\" (or reflectivity, or power reflection coefficient) , and the fraction that is refracted into the second medium is called the \"transmittance\" (or transmissivity, or power transmission coefficient) . Note that these are what would be measured right \"at\" each side of an interface and do not account for attenuation of a wave in an absorbing medium \"following\" transmission or reflection.\nThe reflectance for s-polarized light is\nformula_3\nwhile the reflectance for p-polarized light is\nformula_4\nwhere and are the wave impedances of media 1 and 2, respectively.\nWe assume that the media are non-magnetic (i.e., ), which is typically a good approximation at optical frequencies (and for transparent media at other frequencies). Then the wave impedances are determined solely by the refractive indices and :\nformula_5\nwhere is the impedance of free space and . Making this substitution, we obtain equations using the refractive indices:\nformula_6\nformula_7\nThe second form of each equation is derived from the first by eliminating using Snell's law and trigonometric identities.\nAs a consequence of conservation of energy, one can find the transmitted power (or more correctly, irradiance: power per unit area) simply as the portion of the incident power that isn't reflected:\nformula_8\nand\nformula_9\nNote that all such intensities are measured in terms of a wave's irradiance in the direction normal to the interface; this is also what is measured in typical experiments. That number could be obtained from irradiances \"in the direction of an incident or reflected wave\" (given by the magnitude of a wave's Poynting vector) multiplied by for a wave at an angle to the normal direction (or equivalently, taking the dot product of the Poynting vector with the unit vector normal to the interface). This complication can be ignored in the case of the reflection coefficient, since , so that the ratio of reflected to incident irradiance in the wave's direction is the same as in the direction normal to the interface.\nAlthough these relationships describe the basic physics, in many practical applications one is concerned with \"natural light\" that can be described as unpolarized. That means that there is an equal amount of power in the \"s\" and \"p\" polarizations, so that the \"effective\" reflectivity of the material is just the average of the two reflectivities:\nformula_10\nFor low-precision applications involving unpolarized light, such as computer graphics, rather than rigorously computing the effective reflection coefficient for each angle, Schlick's approximation is often used.\nSpecial cases.\nNormal incidence.\nFor the case of normal incidence, , and there is no distinction between s and p polarization. Thus, the reflectance simplifies to\nformula_11\nFor common glass () surrounded by air (), the power reflectance at normal incidence can be seen to be about 4%, or 8% accounting for both sides of a glass pane.\nBrewster's angle.\nAt a dielectric interface from to , there is a particular angle of incidence at which goes to zero and a p-polarised incident wave is purely refracted, thus all reflected light is s-polarised. This angle is known as Brewster's angle, and is around 56\u00b0 for and (typical glass).\nTotal internal reflection.\nWhen light travelling in a denser medium strikes the surface of a less dense medium (i.e., ), beyond a particular incidence angle known as the \"critical angle\", all light is reflected and . This phenomenon, known as total internal reflection, occurs at incidence angles for which Snell's law predicts that the sine of the angle of refraction would exceed unity (whereas in fact for all real ). For glass with surrounded by air, the critical angle is approximately 42\u00b0.\n45\u00b0 incidence.\nReflection at 45\u00b0 incidence is very commonly used for making 90\u00b0 turns. For the case of light traversing from a less dense medium into a denser one at 45\u00b0 incidence (), it follows algebraically from the above equations that equals the square of :\nformula_12\nThis can be used to either verify the consistency of the measurements of and , or to derive one of them when the other is known. This relationship is only valid for the simple case of a single plane interface between two homogeneous materials, not for films on substrates, where a more complex analysis is required.\nMeasurements of and at 45\u00b0 can be used to estimate the reflectivity at normal incidence. The \"average of averages\" obtained by calculating first the arithmetic as well as the geometric average of and , and then averaging these two averages again arithmetically, gives a value for with an error of less than about 3% for most common optical materials. This is useful because measurements at normal incidence can be difficult to achieve in an experimental setup since the incoming beam and the detector will obstruct each other. However, since the dependence of and on the angle of incidence for angles below 10\u00b0 is very small, a measurement at about 5\u00b0 will usually be a good approximation for normal incidence, while allowing for a separation of the incoming and reflected beam.\nComplex amplitude reflection and transmission coefficients.\nThe above equations relating powers (which could be measured with a photometer for instance) are derived from the Fresnel equations which solve the physical problem in terms of electromagnetic field complex amplitudes, i.e., considering phase shifts in addition to their amplitudes. Those underlying equations supply generally complex-valued ratios of those EM fields and may take several different forms, depending on the formalism used. The complex amplitude coefficients for reflection and transmission are usually represented by lower case and (whereas the power coefficients are capitalized). As before, we are assuming the magnetic permeability, of both media to be equal to the permeability of free space as is essentially true of all dielectrics at optical frequencies.\nIn the following equations and graphs, we adopt the following conventions. For \"s\" polarization, the reflection coefficient is defined as the ratio of the reflected wave's complex electric field amplitude to that of the incident wave, whereas for \"p\" polarization is the ratio of the waves complex \"magnetic\" field amplitudes (or equivalently, the \"negative\" of the ratio of their electric field amplitudes). The transmission coefficient is the ratio of the transmitted wave's complex electric field amplitude to that of the incident wave, for either polarization. The coefficients and are generally different between the \"s\" and \"p\" polarizations, and even at normal incidence (where the designations \"s\" and \"p\" do not even apply!) the sign of is reversed depending on whether the wave is considered to be \"s\" or \"p\" polarized, an artifact of the adopted sign convention (see graph for an air-glass interface at 0\u00b0 incidence).\nThe equations consider a plane wave incident on a plane interface at angle of incidence , a wave reflected at angle , and a wave transmitted at angle . In the case of an interface into an absorbing material (where is complex) or total internal reflection, the angle of transmission does not generally evaluate to a real number. In that case, however, meaningful results can be obtained using formulations of these relationships in which trigonometric functions and geometric angles are avoided; the inhomogeneous waves launched into the second medium cannot be described using a single propagation angle.\nUsing this convention,\nformula_13\nFor the case where the magnetic permeabilities are non-negligible, the equations change such that every appearance of formula_14 is replaced by formula_15 (for both formula_16).\nOne can see that and . One can write very similar equations applying to the ratio of the waves' magnetic fields, but comparison of the electric fields is more conventional.\nBecause the reflected and incident waves propagate in the same medium and make the same angle with the normal to the surface, the power reflection coefficient is just the squared magnitude of :\nformula_17\nOn the other hand, calculation of the power transmission coefficient is less straightforward, since the light travels in different directions in the two media. What's more, the wave impedances in the two media differ; power (irradiance) is given by the square of the electric field amplitude \"divided by\" the characteristic impedance of the medium (or by the square of the magnetic field \"multiplied by\" the characteristic impedance). This results in:\nformula_18\nusing the above definition of . The introduced factor of is the reciprocal of the ratio of the media's wave impedances. The factors adjust the waves' powers so they are reckoned \"in the direction\" normal to the interface, for both the incident and transmitted waves, so that full power transmission corresponds to .\nIn the case of total internal reflection where the power transmission is zero, nevertheless describes the electric field (including its phase) just beyond the interface. This is an evanescent field which does not propagate as a wave (thus ) but has nonzero values very close to the interface. The phase shift of the reflected wave on total internal reflection can similarly be obtained from the phase angles of and (whose magnitudes are unity in this case). These phase shifts are different for \"s\" and \"p\" waves, which is the well-known principle by which total internal reflection is used to effect polarization transformations.\nAlternative forms.\nIn the above formula for , if we put formula_19 (Snell's law) and multiply the numerator and denominator by , we\u00a0obtain\nformula_20\nIf we do likewise with the formula for , the result is easily shown to be equivalent to\nformula_21\nThese formulas are known respectively as \"Fresnel's sine law\" and \"Fresnel's tangent law\". Although at normal incidence these expressions reduce to 0/0, one can see that they yield the correct results in the limit as .\nMultiple surfaces.\nWhen light makes multiple reflections between two or more parallel surfaces, the multiple beams of light generally interfere with one another, resulting in net transmission and reflection amplitudes that depend on the light's wavelength. The interference, however, is seen only when the surfaces are at distances comparable to or smaller than the light's coherence length, which for ordinary white light is few micrometers; it can be much larger for light from a laser.\nAn example of interference between reflections is the iridescent colours seen in a soap bubble or in thin oil films on water. Applications include Fabry\u2013P\u00e9rot interferometers, antireflection coatings, and optical filters. A quantitative analysis of these effects is based on the Fresnel equations, but with additional calculations to account for interference.\nThe transfer-matrix method, or the recursive Rouard method can be used to solve multiple-surface problems.\nHistory.\nIn 1808, \u00c9tienne-Louis Malus discovered that when a ray of light was reflected off a non-metallic surface at the appropriate angle, it behaved like \"one\" of the two rays emerging from a doubly-refractive calcite crystal. He later coined the term \"polarization\" to describe this behavior.\u00a0 In 1815, the dependence of the polarizing angle on the refractive index was determined experimentally by David Brewster. But the \"reason\" for that dependence was such a deep mystery that in late 1817, Thomas\u00a0Young was moved to write:\nIn 1821, however, Augustin-Jean Fresnel derived results equivalent to his sine and tangent laws (above), by modeling light waves as transverse elastic waves with vibrations perpendicular to what had previously been called the plane of polarization. Fresnel promptly confirmed by experiment that the equations correctly predicted the direction of polarization of the reflected beam when the incident beam was polarized at 45\u00b0 to the plane of incidence, for light incident from air onto glass or water; in particular, the equations gave the correct polarization at Brewster's angle. The experimental confirmation was reported in a \"postscript\" to the work in which Fresnel first revealed his theory that light waves, including \"unpolarized\" waves, were \"purely\" transverse.\nDetails of Fresnel's derivation, including the modern forms of the sine law and tangent law, were given later, in a memoir read to the French Academy of Sciences in January 1823. That derivation combined conservation of energy with continuity of the \"tangential\" vibration at the interface, but failed to allow for any condition on the \"normal\" component of vibration. The first derivation from \"electromagnetic\" principles was given by Hendrik Lorentz in 1875.\nIn the same memoir of January 1823, Fresnel found that for angles of incidence greater than the critical angle, his formulas for the reflection coefficients ( and ) gave complex values with unit magnitudes. Noting that the magnitude, as usual, represented the ratio of peak amplitudes, he guessed that the argument represented the phase shift, and verified the hypothesis experimentally. The verification involved\nThus he finally had a quantitative theory for what we now call the \"Fresnel rhomb\" \u2014 a device that he had been using in experiments, in one form or another, since 1817 (see \"Fresnel rhomb \u00a7History\").\nThe success of the complex reflection coefficient inspired James MacCullagh and Augustin-Louis Cauchy, beginning in 1836, to analyze reflection from metals by using the Fresnel equations with a complex refractive index.\nFour weeks before he presented his completed theory of total internal reflection and the rhomb, Fresnel submitted a memoir in which he introduced the needed terms \"linear polarization\", \"circular polarization\", and \"elliptical polarization\", and in which he explained optical rotation as a species of birefringence: linearly-polarized light can be resolved into two circularly-polarized components rotating in opposite directions, and if these propagate at different speeds, the phase difference between them \u2014 hence the orientation of their linearly-polarized resultant \u2014 will vary continuously with distance.\nThus Fresnel's interpretation of the complex values of his reflection coefficients marked the confluence of several streams of his research and, arguably, the essential completion of his reconstruction of physical optics on the transverse-wave hypothesis (see \"Augustin-Jean Fresnel\").\nDerivation.\nHere we systematically derive the above relations from electromagnetic premises.\nMaterial parameters.\nIn order to compute meaningful Fresnel coefficients, we must assume that the medium is (approximately) linear and homogeneous. If the medium is also isotropic, the four field vectors are related by\nformula_22\nwhere and are scalars, known respectively as the (electric) \"permittivity\" and the (magnetic) \"permeability\" of the medium. For vacuum, these have the values and , respectively. Hence we define the \"relative\" permittivity (or dielectric constant) , and the \"relative\" permeability .\nIn optics it is common to assume that the medium is non-magnetic, so that . For ferromagnetic materials at radio/microwave frequencies, larger values of must be taken into account. But, for optically transparent media, and for all other materials at optical frequencies (except possible metamaterials), is indeed very close to 1; that is, .\nIn optics, one usually knows the refractive index of the medium, which is the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum () to the speed of light in the medium. In the analysis of partial reflection and transmission, one is also interested in the electromagnetic wave impedance , which is the ratio of the amplitude of to the amplitude of . It is therefore desirable to express and in terms of and , and thence to relate to . The last-mentioned relation, however, will make it convenient to derive the reflection coefficients in terms of the wave \"admittance\" , which is the reciprocal of the wave impedance .\nIn the case of \"uniform plane sinusoidal\" waves, the wave impedance or admittance is known as the \"intrinsic\" impedance or admittance of the medium. This case is the one for which the Fresnel coefficients are to be derived.\nElectromagnetic plane waves.\nIn a uniform plane sinusoidal electromagnetic wave, the electric field has the form\nwhere is the (constant) complex amplitude vector, is the imaginary unit, is the wave vector (whose magnitude is the angular wavenumber), is the position vector, is the angular frequency, is time, and it is understood that the \"real part\" of the expression is the physical field.\u00a0 The value of the expression is unchanged if the position varies in a direction normal to ; hence \"is normal to the wavefronts\".\nTo advance the phase by the angle \"\u03d5\", we replace by (that is, we replace by ), with the result that the (complex) field is multiplied by . So a phase \"advance\" is equivalent to multiplication by a complex constant with a \"negative\" argument. This becomes more obvious when the field () is factored as , where the last factor contains the time-dependence. That factor also implies that differentiation w.r.t.\u00a0time corresponds to multiplication by .\nIf \"\u2113\" is the component of in the direction of , the field () can be written .\u00a0 If the argument of is to be constant,\u00a0 \"\u2113\"\u00a0must increase at the velocity formula_23 known as the \"phase velocity\" . This in turn is equal to Solving for gives\nAs usual, we drop the time-dependent factor , which is understood to multiply every complex field quantity. The electric field for a uniform plane sine wave will then be represented by the location-dependent \"phasor\"\nFor fields of that form, Faraday's law and the Maxwell-Amp\u00e8re law respectively reduce to\nformula_24\nPutting and , as above, we can eliminate and to obtain equations in only and :\nformula_25\nIf the material parameters and are real (as in a lossless dielectric), these equations show that form a \"right-handed orthogonal triad\", so that the same equations apply to the magnitudes of the respective vectors. Taking the magnitude equations and substituting from (), we obtain\nformula_26\nwhere and are the magnitudes of and . Multiplying the last two equations gives\nDividing (or cross-multiplying) the same two equations gives , where\nThis is the \"intrinsic admittance\".\nFrom () we obtain the phase velocity For vacuum this reduces to Dividing the second result by the first gives\nformula_27\nFor a \"non-magnetic\" medium (the usual case), this becomes .\nTaking the reciprocal of (), we find that the intrinsic \"impedance\" is In vacuum this takes the value formula_28 known as the impedance of free space. By division, /\\epsilon_{\\text{rel}}}&lt;/math&gt;.}} For a \"non-magnetic\" medium, this becomes formula_29\nWave vectors.\nIn Cartesian coordinates , let the region have refractive index , intrinsic admittance , etc., and let the region have refractive index , intrinsic admittance , etc. Then the plane is the interface, and the axis is normal to the interface (see diagram). Let and (in bold roman type) be the unit vectors in the and directions, respectively. Let the plane of incidence be the plane (the plane of the page), with the angle of incidence measured from towards . Let the angle of refraction, measured in the same sense, be , where the subscript stands for \"transmitted\" (reserving for \"reflected\").\nIn the absence of Doppler shifts, \"\u03c9\" does not change on reflection or refraction. Hence, by (), the magnitude of the wave vector is proportional to the refractive index.\nSo, for a given , if we \"redefine\" as the magnitude of the wave vector in the \"reference\" medium (for which ), then the wave vector has magnitude in the first medium (region in the diagram) and magnitude in the second medium. From the magnitudes and the geometry, we find that the wave vectors are\nformula_30\nwhere the last step uses Snell's law. The corresponding dot products in the phasor form () are\nHence:\n\"s\" components.\nFor the \"s\" polarization, the field is parallel to the axis and may therefore be described by its component in the \u00a0direction. Let the reflection and transmission coefficients be and , respectively. Then, if the incident field is taken to have unit amplitude, the phasor form () of its -component is\nand the reflected and transmitted fields, in the same form, are\n E_\\text{t} &amp;= t_{s\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{t}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}.\nUnder the sign convention used in this article, a positive reflection or transmission coefficient is one that preserves the direction of the \"transverse\" field, meaning (in this context) the field normal to the plane of incidence. For the \"s\" polarization, that means the field. If the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields (in the above equations) are in the -direction (\"out of the page\"), then the respective fields are in the directions of the red arrows, since form a right-handed orthogonal triad. The fields may therefore be described by their components in the directions of those arrows, denoted by . Then, since ,\n H_\\text{r} &amp;=\\, Y_1 r_{s\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{r}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}\\\\\n H_\\text{t} &amp;=\\, Y_2 t_{s\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{t}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}.\nAt the interface, by the usual interface conditions for electromagnetic fields, the tangential components of the and fields must be continuous; that is,\nWhen we substitute from equations () to () and then from (), the exponential factors cancel out, so that the interface conditions reduce to the simultaneous equations\nwhich are easily solved for and , yielding\nand\nAt \"normal incidence\" , indicated by an additional subscript 0, these results become\nand\nAt \"grazing incidence\" , we have , hence and .\n\"p\" components.\nFor the \"p\" polarization, the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields are parallel to the red arrows and may therefore be described by their components in the directions of those arrows. Let those components be (redefining the symbols for the new context). Let the reflection and transmission coefficients be and . Then, if the incident field is taken to have unit amplitude, we have\n E_\\text{r} &amp;= r_{p\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{r}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}\\\\\n E_\\text{t} &amp;= t_{p\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{t}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}.\nIf the fields are in the directions of the red arrows, then, in order for to form a right-handed orthogonal triad, the respective fields must be in the -direction (\"into the page\") and may therefore be described by their components in that direction. This is consistent with the adopted sign convention, namely that a positive reflection or transmission coefficient is one that preserves the direction of the transverse field the field in the case of the \"p\" polarization. The agreement of the \"other\" field with the red arrows reveals an alternative definition of the sign convention: that a positive reflection or transmission coefficient is one for which the field vector in the plane of incidence points towards the same medium before and after reflection or transmission.\nSo, for the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields, let the respective components in the -direction be . Then, since ,\n H_\\text{r} &amp;=\\, Y_1 r_{p\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{r}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}\\\\\n H_\\text{t} &amp;=\\, Y_2 t_{p\\,} e^{i\\mathbf{k}_\\text{t}\\mathbf{\\cdot r}}.\nAt the interface, the tangential components of the and fields must be continuous; that is,\nWhen we substitute from equations () and () and then from (), the exponential factors again cancel out, so that the interface conditions reduce to\nSolving for and , we find\nand\nAt \"normal incidence\" indicated by an additional subscript 0, these results become\nand\nAt , we again have , hence and .\nComparing () and () with () and (), we see that at \"normal\" incidence, under the adopted sign convention, the transmission coefficients for the two polarizations are equal, whereas the reflection coefficients have equal magnitudes but opposite signs. While this clash of signs is a disadvantage of the convention, the attendant advantage is that the signs agree at \"grazing\" incidence.\nPower ratios (reflectivity and transmissivity).\nThe \"Poynting vector\" for a wave is a vector whose component in any direction is the \"irradiance\" (power per unit area) of that wave on a surface perpendicular to that direction. For a plane sinusoidal wave the Poynting vector is , where and are due \"only\" to the wave in question, and the asterisk denotes complex conjugation. Inside a lossless dielectric (the usual case), and are in phase, and at right angles to each other and to the wave vector ; so, for s polarization, using the and components of and respectively (or for p polarization, using the and components of and ), the irradiance in the direction of is given simply by , which is in a medium of intrinsic impedance . To compute the irradiance in the direction normal to the interface, as we shall require in the definition of the power transmission coefficient, we could use only the component (rather than the full component) of or or, equivalently, simply multiply by the proper geometric factor, obtaining .\nFrom equations () and (), taking squared magnitudes, we find that the \"reflectivity\" (ratio of reflected power to incident power) is\nfor the s polarization, and\nfor the p polarization. Note that when comparing the powers of two such waves in the same medium and with the same cos\"\u03b8\", the impedance and geometric factors mentioned above are identical and cancel out. But in computing the power \"transmission\" (below), these factors must be taken into account.\nThe simplest way to obtain the power transmission coefficient (\"transmissivity\", the ratio of transmitted power to incident power \"in the direction normal to the interface\", i.e. the direction) is to use (conservation of energy). In this way we find\nfor the s polarization, and\nfor the p polarization.\nIn the case of an interface between two lossless media (for which \u03f5 and \u03bc are \"real\" and positive), one can obtain these results directly using the squared magnitudes of the amplitude transmission coefficients that we found earlier in equations () and (). But, for given amplitude (as noted above), the component of the Poynting vector in the direction is proportional to the geometric factor and inversely proportional to the wave impedance . Applying these corrections to each wave, we obtain two ratios multiplying the square of the amplitude transmission coefficient:\nfor the s polarization, and\nfor the p polarization. The last two equations apply only to lossless dielectrics, and only at incidence angles smaller than the critical angle (beyond which, of course, ).\nFor unpolarized light:\nformula_31\nformula_32\nwhere formula_33.\nEqual refractive indices.\nFrom equations () and (), we see that two dissimilar media will have the same refractive index, but different admittances, if the ratio of their permeabilities is the inverse of the ratio of their permittivities. In that unusual situation we have (that is, the transmitted ray is undeviated), so that the cosines in equations (), (), (), (), and () to () cancel out, and all the reflection and transmission ratios become independent of the angle of incidence; in other words, the ratios for normal incidence become applicable to all angles of incidence. When extended to spherical reflection or scattering, this results in the Kerker effect for Mie scattering.\nNon-magnetic media.\nSince the Fresnel equations were developed for optics, they are usually given for non-magnetic materials. Dividing () by ()) yields\nformula_34\nFor non-magnetic media we can substitute the vacuum permeability for , so that\nformula_35\nthat is, the admittances are simply proportional to the corresponding refractive indices. When we make these substitutions in equations () to () and equations () to (), the factor \"c\u03bc\"0 cancels out. For the amplitude coefficients we obtain:\nFor the case of normal incidence these reduce to:\nThe power reflection coefficients become:\nThe power transmissions can then be found from .\nBrewster's angle.\nFor equal permeabilities (e.g., non-magnetic media), if and are \"complementary\", we can substitute for , and for , so that the numerator in equation () becomes , which is zero (by Snell's law). Hence and only the s-polarized component is reflected. This is what happens at the Brewster angle. Substituting for in Snell's law, we readily obtain\nfor Brewster's angle.\nEqual permittivities.\nAlthough it is not encountered in practice, the equations can also apply to the case of two media with a common permittivity but different refractive indices due to different permeabilities. From equations () and (), if is fixed instead of , then becomes \"inversely\" proportional to , with the result that the subscripts 1 and 2 in equations () to () are interchanged (due to the additional step of multiplying the numerator and denominator by ). Hence, in () and (), the expressions for and in terms of refractive indices will be interchanged, so that Brewster's angle () will give instead of , and any beam reflected at that angle will be p-polarized instead of s-polarized. Similarly, Fresnel's sine law will apply to the p polarization instead of the s polarization, and his tangent law to the s polarization instead of the p polarization.\nThis switch of polarizations has an analog in the old mechanical theory of light waves (see \"\u00a7History\", above). One could predict reflection coefficients that agreed with observation by supposing (like Fresnel) that different refractive indices were due to different \"densities\" and that the vibrations were \"normal\" to what was then called the plane of polarization, or by supposing (like MacCullagh and Neumann) that different refractive indices were due to different \"elasticities\" and that the vibrations were \"parallel\" to that plane. Thus the condition of equal permittivities and unequal permeabilities, although not realistic, is of some historical interest."}
{"id": "11152", "revid": "42502466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11152", "title": "Figure skating", "text": "Figure skating is a sport in which individuals, pairs, or groups perform on figure skates on ice. It was the first winter sport to be included in the Olympic Games, with its introduction occurring at the 1908 Olympics in London. The Olympic disciplines are men's singles, women's singles, pair skating, and ice dance; the four individual disciplines are also combined into a team event, which was first included in the Winter Olympics in 2014. The non-Olympic disciplines include synchronized skating, Theater on Ice, and four skating. From intermediate through senior-level competition, skaters generally perform two programs (the short program and the free skate), which, depending on the discipline, may include spins, jumps, moves in the field, lifts, throw jumps, death spirals, and other elements or moves.\nFigure skaters compete at various levels from beginner up to the Olympic level (senior) at local, regional, sectional, national, and international competitions. The International Skating Union (ISU) regulates international figure skating judging and competitions. These include the Winter Olympics, the World Championships, the World Junior Championships, the European Championships, the Four Continents Championships, the Grand Prix series (senior and junior), and the ISU Challenger Series.\nThe sport is also associated with show business. Major competitions generally conclude with exhibition galas, in which the top skaters from each discipline perform non-competitive programs. Many skaters, both during and after their competitive careers, also skate in ice shows, which run during the competitive season and the off-season.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"professional\" in skating refers not to skill level but competitive status. Figure skaters competing at the highest levels of international competition are not \"professional\" skaters. They are sometimes referred to as amateurs, even though some earn money. Professional skaters include those who have lost their ISU eligibility and those who perform only in shows. They may also include former Olympic and World champions who have ended their competitive career, as well as skaters with little or no international competitive experience. In addition to performing in ice shows, professional skaters often compete in professional competitions, which are held throughout the world, each with its own format and rules.\nThe term \"figure skating\" is an English language term; the sport is called \"Eiskunstlauf\" in German and \"patinage artistique\" in French.\nFigure skates.\nThe most visible difference from ice hockey skates is that figure skates have a set of large, jagged teeth called \"toe picks\" on the front part of the blade. These are used primarily in jumping and should not be used for stroking or spins. If used during a spin, the toe pick will cause the skater to lose momentum, or move away from the center of the spin. Blades are mounted to the sole and heel of the boot with screws. Typically, high-level figure skaters are professionally fitted for their boots and blades at a reputable skate shop. Professionals are also employed to sharpen blades to individual requirements.\nBlades are about thick. When viewed from the side, the blade of a figure skate is not flat, but curved slightly, forming an arc of a circle with a radius of . This curvature is referred to as the \"rocker\" of the blade. The \"sweet spot\" is the part of the blade on which all spins are rotated; this is usually located near the stanchion of the blade, below the ball of the foot. The blade is also \"hollow ground\"; a groove on the bottom of the blade creates two distinct edges, inside and outside. The inside edge of the blade is on the side closest to the skater; the outside edge of the blade is on the side farthest from the skater. In figure skating, it is always desirable to skate on only one edge of the blade. Skating on both at the same time (which is referred to as a \"flat\") may result in lower skating skills scores. The apparently effortless power and glide across the ice exhibited by elite figure skaters fundamentally derives from efficient use of the edges to generate speed.\nSkates used in singles and pair skating have a set of large, jagged teeth called a toepick on the front of each blade. The toepicks are mainly used to help launch the skater into the air for the take-off when performing jumps. Ice dance blades have smaller toepicks than blades used for the other disciplines.\nDuring a spin, skaters use the sweet spot of the blade, which is one of two rockers to be found on a blade and is the roundest portion of the blade. The sweet spot is located just behind the toe pick and near the middle of the blade. The other rocker is the more general curvature of the blade when stroking or gliding.\nIce dancers' blades are about an inch shorter in the rear than those used by skaters in other disciplines, to accommodate the intricate footwork and close partnering in dance. Dancers' blades also have a smaller toepick as they do not require the large toepick used for jumping in the other disciplines. Hard plastic \"skate guards\" are used when the skater must walk in his or her skates when not on the ice, to protect the blade from dirt or material on the ground that may dull the blade. Soft blade covers called \"soakers\" are used to absorb condensation and protect the blades from rust when the skates are not being worn. In competition, skaters are allowed three minutes to make repairs to their skates.\nThere are many different types of boots and blades to suit different disciplines and abilities. For example, athletes who are performing advanced multi-rotational jumps often need a stiffer boot that is higher and gives more support. Athletes working on single or double jumps require less support and may use a less stiff boot. Ice dancers may prefer a lower cut boot that is designed to enable more knee bend.\nLikewise, blades designed for free and pairs skating have a longer tail to assist landing. The blade profile and picks are designed to assist with spinning, jump entry, take-off, landing, and exit. Modern blade technology increasingly uses carbon fibre and materials other than steel to make blades lighter. These materials may also be more flexible and help cushion jump landings and be protective of young athlete's joints. Ice dance blades have short tails to enable close foot work and reduce the risk of blade clash in close complex moves. They may also be thinner to assist with glide and fast changes of edge.\nOff-ice training is the term for physical conditioning that takes place off the ice. Besides regular physical exercise, skaters do walk-throughs of jumps off the ice to practice sufficient rotation and height of their jumps, and to practice consistency in landing on one foot. In 2020/2021 many athletes relied on a variety of off-ice training and conditioning methods due to rinks being closed due to COVID-19.\nIce rinks and rink equipment.\nSince 1980, all figure skating competitions must be held in completely covered and enclosed rinks. The rule was expanded to include practice rinks in 1984. According to figure skating historian James R. Hines, the development of indoor ice rinks, other than the development of the bladed skate during the 14th century and the practice of fastening boots permanently to skates in the 19th century, has had the greatest effect on figure skating. It allowed for skating year-round, as well as anywhere in the world, and prevented the cancellation of competitive events due to the lack of ice in outdoor rinks. The first attempts to make artificial ice occurred during the 1870s in England and the U.S. The first notable indoor ice rink was made in 1876, by John Gamgee, in Chelsea along the north bank of the Thames River; it measured 24 by 40 feet. By the end of the 19th century, many major cities in Europe and North America had indoor rinks.\nThere is significant variation in the dimensions of ice rinks. Olympic-sized rinks have dimensions of , NHL-sized rinks are , while European rinks are sometimes . The ISU prefers Olympic-sized rinks for figure skating competitions, particularly for major events. According to ISU rule 342, a figure skating rink for an ISU event \"if possible, shall measure sixty (60) meters in one direction and thirty (30) meters in the other, but not larger, and not less than fifty-six (56) meters in one direction and twenty-six (26) meters in the other.\" The scoring system rewards skaters who have good ice coverage, i.e. those who efficiently cover the entire ice surface during their programs. Olympic-sized rinks make the differences in skill between skaters more apparent but they are not available for all events. If a rink has different dimensions, a skater's jump setup and speed may be hindered as he or she adjusts.\nIce quality is judged by smoothness, friction, hardness, and brittleness. Factors affecting ice quality include temperature, water quality, and usage, with toe picks causing more deterioration. For figure skating, the ice surface temperature is normally maintained between , with the Olympic disciplines requiring slightly softer ice (\u22123.5\u00b0C) than synchronized skating (\u22125.5\u00b0C). Typically after every two warm-up groups, an ice resurfacer cleans and smooths the surface of the ice sheet. Inadequate ice quality may affect skaters' performances.\nSome rinks have a harness system installed to help skaters learn new jumps in a controlled manner. A heavy-duty cable is securely attached to two of the walls around the ice, with a set of pulleys riding on the cable. The skater wears a vest or belt, with a cable or rope attached to it, and the cable/rope is threaded through the movable pulley on the cable above. The coach holds the other end of the cable and lifts the skater by pulling the cable/rope. The skater can then practice the jump with the coach assisting the completion. This is used when a skater needs more help on a jump. However, if the coaches see fit, they could use another harness usually called \"the fishing pole harness.\" It is named that because it looks similar to a fishing pole. The skater will put on the harness and the coach will adjust it so it fits the skater. The skater will go and do the jump with very little help from their coach. They can also do the jump on any pattern they choose, whereas, the other harness, they must do in a straight line.\nDisciplines.\nFigure skating consists of the following disciplines:\nElements and moves.\nEach element receives a score according to its base value and grade of execution (GOE), resulting in a combined technical elements score (TES). At competitions, a technical specialist identifies the elements and assigns each one a level of difficulty, ranging from B (Basic) to Level 4 (most difficult). For each element, a panel of judges determines the GOE, ranging between \u22125 and +5, according to how well the skater executes the element. The GOE is weighted according to the base value of the element. Through the ISU guidelines skaters must perform a minimum of seven elements in their short program and twelve elements in their long program.\nThe ISU defines a fall as a loss of control with the result that the majority of the skater's body weight is not on the blade but supported by hands, knees, or buttocks.\nJumps.\nJumps involve the skater leaping into the air and rotating rapidly to land after completing one or more rotations. There are many types of jumps, identified by the way the skater takes off and lands, as well as by the number of rotations that are completed.\nEach jump receives a score according to its base value and grade of execution (GOE). Quality of execution, technique, height, speed, flow and ice coverage are considered by the judges. An \"under-rotated\" jump (indicated by&lt;) is \"missing rotation of more than , but less than revolution\" and receives 70% of the base value. A \"downgraded\" jump (indicated by\u00ab) is \"missing rotation of revolution or more\". A downgraded triple is treated as a double jump, while a downgraded double is treated as a single jump.\nAn edge violation occurs when a skater executes a jump on the incorrect edge. The hollow is a groove on the bottom of the blade which creates two distinct edges, inside and outside. The inside edge of the blade is on the side closest to the skater, the outside edge is on the side farthest from the skater, and a \"flat\" refers to skating on both edges at the same time, which is discouraged. An unclear edge or edge violation is indicated with an 'e' and reflected in the GOE according to the severity of the problem. \"Flutz\" and \"lip\" are the colloquial terms for a Lutz and flip jump with an edge violation.\nIn 1982, the ISU enacted a rule stating that a skater may perform each type of triple only once in a program, or twice if one of them is incorporated into a combination or sequence. For a set of jumps to be considered a \"combination\", each jump must take off from the landing edge of the previous jump, with no steps, turns, or change of edge between jumps. Toe loops and loops are commonly performed as the second or third jump in a combination because they take off from the back outside edge of the landing foot, or skating leg. To perform a salchow or flip on the back end of a combination, a half loop (which is actually a full rotation, but lands on a back inside edge of the landing leg) may be used as a connecting jump. In contrast, jump \"sequences\" are sets of jumps that may be linked by non-listed jumps or hops. Sequences are worth 80% of the combined value of the same jumps executed in combination.\nA figure skater only needs to be able to jump in one direction, either clockwise or counter-clockwise. The vast majority of figure skaters prefer to rotate in a counter-clockwise direction when jumping. Thus, for clarity, all jumps will be described for a skater jumping counter-clockwise.\nThere are six jumps in figure skating that count as jump elements. All six are landed on one foot on the back outside edge (with counter-clockwise rotation, for single and multi-revolution jumps), but have different takeoffs, by which they may be distinguished. Jumps are divided into two different categories: \"toe jumps\" and \"edge jumps\".\nThe number of rotations performed in the air determines whether the jump is a single, double, triple, or quadruple (commonly known as a \"quad\"). The simplest jump is a waltz jump, which can only be done in a half-leap and is not classified as a single, double, or triple jump. Triple jumps, other than the triple Axel, are commonly performed by female single skaters. It is rare for a female skater to land a quadruple jump, and very few female single skaters have been credited with quads in competition. Senior-level male single skaters perform mostly triple and quadruple jumps in competition. The final of the six jumps to be landed cleanly as a quad in international competition is the elusive quadruple Axel. A few male skaters made valiant efforts to land the immensely difficult four-and-a-half revolution jump (most notably two-time Olympic Champion from Japan, Yuzuru Hanyu), but failed to land one cleanly and fully-rotated. The first clean and fully-rotated quad Axel was successfully landed by American men's skater Ilia Malinin at the 2022 CS U.S. Classic, 34 years after the first-ever quadruple jump (a quad toe loop) was landed by Canada's Kurt Browning at the World Figure Skating Championships in 1988.\nSome elite skaters can complete a jump in about one second, with 26 inches of height and 10 feet in distance. The takeoff speed of a jump can reach up to 25 kilometers per hour. Prior to most jumps, a figure skater needs to skate backward to build power and speed.\nToe jumps.\nToe jumps are launched by digging the toe pick of one skate into the ice, using it to vault into the air with the opposite leg. The main toe jumps are (in order of score value):\nAll of the above descriptions assume a counter-clockwise direction of rotation, landing backwards on the outside edge of the right foot. (For clockwise rotation, the skater takes off using the alternative foot and lands backwards on the outside edge of the left foot.)\nEdge jumps.\nEdge jumps use no toe assist, and include (in order of score value):\nAgain, these descriptions assume a counter-clockwise direction of rotation, landing backwards on the outside edge of the right foot. (For clockwise rotation, the skater takes off using the alternative foot and always lands backwards on the outside edge of the left foot.)\nOther jumps.\nSeveral other jumps are usually performed only as single jumps and in elite skating are used as transitional movements or highlights in step sequences. These include the half toe loop (ballet jump), half loop, half flip, walley jump, waltz jump, inside Axel, one-foot Axel, stag jump, and split jump. There are two kinds of split jump:\nSpins.\nSpins are an element in which the skater rotates, centered on a single point on the ice, while holding one or more body positions. They are performed by all disciplines of the sport. As \"The New York Times\" says, \"While jumps look like sport, spins look more like art. While jumps provide the suspense, spins provide the scenery, but there is so much more to the scenery than most viewers have time or means to grasp\". According to world champion and figure skating commentator Scott Hamilton, spins are often used \"as breathing points or transitions to bigger things\"\nFigure skating spins, along with jumps, spirals, and spread eagles were originally individual compulsory figures, sometimes special figures. Unlike jumps, spins were a \"graceful and appreciated\" part of figure skating throughout the 19th century. They advanced between World War I and World War II; by the late 1930s, all three basic spin positions were used.\nThere are two types of spins, the forward spin and the backward spin. There are three basic spin positions: the upright spin, the sit spin, and the camel spin. Skaters also perform flying spins and combination spins.\nLifts.\nFigure skating lifts are required elements in pair skating and ice dance. There are five groups of lifts in pair skating, categorized in order of increasing level of difficulty. Judges look for the following when evaluating pair lifts: speed of entry and exit; control of the woman's free leg when she is exiting out of the lift, with the goal of keeping the leg high and sweeping; the position of the woman in the air; the man's footwork; quick and easy changes of position; and the maintenance of flow throughout the lift. Twist lifts are \"the most thrilling and exciting component in pair skating\". They can also be the most difficult movement to perform correctly. They require more strength and coordination than many other pair elements, and are usually the first or second element in a program. According to the International Skating Union (ISU), \"the Woman must be caught in the air at the waist by the Man prior to landing and be assisted to a smooth landing on the ice on a backward outside edge on one foot\" during a twist lift.\nThe ISU defines dance lifts as \"a movement in which one of the partners is elevated with active and/or passive assistance of the other partner to any permitted height, sustained there and set down on the ice\". Dance lifts are delineated from pair lifts to ensure that ice dance and pair skating remain separate disciplines. After the judging system changed from the 6.0 system to the ISU Judging System (IJS), dance lifts became more \"athletic, dramatic and exciting\". There are two types of dance lifts: short lifts, which should be done in under seven seconds; and combination lifts, which should be done in under 12 seconds. A well-balanced free dance program in ice dance must include dance lifts.\nTurns, steps, moves.\nAlong with other forms of skating, figure skating is one of the only human powered activities where travelling backwards is integral to the discipline. The ability to skate well backwards and forwards are considered to be equally important, as is the ability to transition well between the two.\nStep sequences are a required element in all four Olympic disciplines. The pattern can be straight line, circular, or serpentine. The step sequence consists of a combination of turns, steps, hops and edge changes. Additionally, steps and turns can be used as transitions between elements. The various turns, which skaters can incorporate into step sequences, include:\nChoctaws are the two-foot equivalents of rockers and counters. Other movements that may be incorporated into step sequences or used as connecting elements include lunges and spread eagles. An Ina Bauer is similar to a spread eagle performed with one knee bent and typically an arched back. Hydroblading refers to a deep edge performed with the body as low as possible to the ice in a near-horizontal position.\nMoves in the field is a pre-determined required sequence that demonstrated basic skating skills and edge control. In the context of a competitive program, they include sequences that may include spirals, spread eagles, Ina Bauers, hydroblading, and similar extended edge moves, along with loops, twizzles, and different kinds of turns.\nA spiral is an element in which the skater moves across the ice on a specific edge with the free leg held at hip level or above. Spirals are distinguished by the edge of the blade used (inside or outside), the direction of motion (forward or backward), and the skater's position. A spiral sequence is one or more spiral positions and edges done in sequence. Judges look at the depth, stability, and control of the skating edge, speed and ice coverage, extension, and other factors. Some skaters can change edges during a spiral, i.e. from inside to outside edge. Spirals performed on a \"flat\" are generally not considered as true spirals. Spiral sequences were required in women's and pair skating prior to the 2012\u201313 season, but from the 2012\u201313 season onward, they were replaced by the choreographic sequence. The choreographic sequence consists of moves in the field, unlisted jumps, spinning movements, etc. and is required for the men's, women's and pair free program.\nA death spiral is a required element of pair skating. There are four varieties distinguished by the lady's edge and direction of motion. The man performs a pivot, one toe anchored in the ice, while holding the hand of his partner, who circles him on a deep edge with her body almost parallel to the ice. As of 2011, the woman's head must at some time reach her skating knee. The man must also be in a full pivot position and the death spiral must be held for a minimum amount of rotation, depending on the level.\nCompetition format and scoring.\nThe ISU is the governing body for international competitions in figure skating, including the World Championships and the figure skating events at the Winter Olympic Games. Medals are awarded for overall results; the standard medals are gold for first place, silver for second, and bronze for third place. U.S. Figure Skating also awards pewter medals for fourth-place finishers in national events. Additionally, at the World, European, Four Continents, and World Junior Championships, the ISU awards \"small medals\" for segment results (short and free program) (Since 2009). A medal is generally attributed to only one country, even if a partnership is composed of skaters with different nationalities. A notable exception was the pair skating partnership between Ludowika Eilers and Walter Jakobsson; their 1910\u201311 medals were attributed to both Germany and Finland. Beyond the early 20th century, no skaters have been allowed to represent two countries in the same competition.\nIn singles and pairs figure skating competition, competitors perform two programs: the short program, in which they complete a set of required elements consisting of jumps, spins and steps; and the free skate, also known as the \"long program\", in which they have a slightly wider choice of elements. Under both the 6.0 system and the ISU Judging System, the judges consider the \"complete package\" when evaluating performances, i.e. the best jumper is not always placed first if the judges consider the difference in jumping execution to be outweighed by another skater's speed, spins, presentation, etc.\nIce dance competitions formerly consisted of three phases: one or more compulsory dances; an original dance to a ballroom rhythm that was designated annually; and a free dance to music of the skaters' own choice. Beginning in the 2010\u201311 season, the compulsory and original dances were merged into the short dance, which itself was renamed the \"rhythm dance\" in June 2018, before the 2018\u201319 season.\nMedals.\nSource:\nOverall Medals (Stage 1 + Stage 2).\nMedals awarded to the skaters who achieved the highest overall placements in each discipline.\nSmall Medals.\nSmall Medals awarded only at ISU Championships since probably 2009:\nStage 1 = Small medals awarded to the skaters who achieved the highest short program or rhythm dance placements in each discipline.\nStage 2 = Small medals awarded to the skaters who achieved the highest free skating or free dance placements in each discipline.\nSmall Medals awarded only at ISU Championships:\nSmall Medals not awarded in:\n6.0 System.\nSkating was formerly judged for \"technical merit\" (in the free skate), \"required elements\" (in the short program), and \"presentation\" (in both programs). The marks for each program ran from 0.0 to 6.0, the latter being the highest. These marks were used to determine a preference ranking (or \"ordinal\") separately for each judge; the judges' preferences were then combined to determine placements for each skater in each program. The placements for the two programs were then combined, with the free skate placement weighted more heavily than the short program. The highest placing individual (based on the sum of the weighted placements) was declared the winner.\nISU Judging System.\nIn 2004, in response to the judging controversy during the 2002 Winter Olympics, the ISU adopted the International Judging System (IJS), which became mandatory at all international competitions in 2006, including the 2006 Winter Olympics. The new system is sometimes informally referred to as the \"Code of Points\", however, the ISU has never used the term to describe their system in any of their official communications.\nUnder the IJS, points are awarded individually for each skating element, and the sum of these points is the \"total element score\" (TES). Competitive programs are constrained to include a set number of elements. Each element is judged first by a technical specialist who identifies the specific element and determines its \"base value\". This is done using instant replay video to verify features that distinguish different elements; e.g. the exact foot position at take-off and landing of a jump. A panel of nine judges then each award a mark for the quality and execution of the element. This mark, called the \"grade of execution\" (GOE), is an integer with a minimum value of \u22125 and a maximum value of +5. The GOE mark is then translated into another value by using the table of values in ISU rule 322. The GOE value from the nine judges is then processed with a computerized random selection of nine judges, the highest and lowest values are then discarded, and finally the average of the remaining seven is calculated. This average value is then added to (or subtracted from) the base value to determine the total value for the element.\nNote: The IJS previously used a GOE scale of \u22123 to +3, but this was changed for the 2018\u201319 season.\nThe \"program components score\" (PCS) awards points to holistic aspects of a program or other nuances that are not rewarded in the \"total element score\". The components are:\nA detailed description of each component is given in ISU rule 322.2. Judges award each component a raw mark from 0 to 10 in increments of 0.25, with a mark of 5 being defined as \"average\". For each separate component, the raw marks are then selected, trimmed, and averaged in a manner akin to determining a \"grade of execution\". The trimmed mean scores are then translated into a factored mark by multiplying by a factor that depends on the discipline, competition segment, and level. Then the five (or four) factored marks are added to give the final PCS score.\nThe \"total element score\" and the \"program components score\" are added to give the total score for a competition segment (TSS). A skater's final placement is determined by the total of their scores in all segments of a competition. No ordinal rankings are used to determine the final results.\nOther judging and competition.\nThere are also skating competitions organized for professional skaters by independent promoters. These competitions use judging rules set by whoever organizes the competition. There is no \"professional league\". Well-known professional competitions in the past have included the World Professional Championships (held in Landover, Maryland), the Challenge Of Champions, the Canadian Professional Championships and the World Professional Championships (held in Jaca, Spain).\nThe Ice Skating Institute (ISI), an international ice rink trade organization, runs its own competitive and test program aimed at recreational skaters. Originally headquartered in Minnesota, the organization now operates out of Dallas, Texas. ISI competitions are open to any member that have registered their tests. There are very few \"qualifying\" competitions, although some districts hold Gold Competitions for that season's first-place winners. ISI competitions are especially popular in Asian countries that do not have established ISU member federations. The Gay Games have also included skating competitions for same-gender pairs and dance couples under ISI sponsorship. Other figure skating competitions for adults also attract participants from diverse cultures.\nWorld standings and season's bests.\nWorld standings.\nThe world standing (WS) of a skater/couple is calculated based on the results over the current and preceding two seasons. Competitors receive points based on their final placement at an event and the event's weight. The following events receive points:\nFollowing the current season's World Championships, the results from the earliest season are deleted. A new partnership starts with zero points; there is no transfer of WS points if a pair or ice dance couple split up and form a new partnership.\nThese standings do not necessarily reflect the capabilities of the skater(s). Due to limits on entries to events (no more than three from each country), and varying numbers of high-level skaters in each country, skaters from some countries may find it more difficult to qualify to compete at major events. Thus, a skater with a lower SB but from a country with few high-level skaters may qualify to a major event while a skater with a much higher SB but from a country with more than three high-level skaters may not be sent. As a result, it is possible for a skater who regularly scores higher to end up with a much lower world standing.\nThe \"season's world ranking\" of a skater/couple is calculated similarly to the overall world standing but is based on the results of the ongoing season only.\nSeason's bests.\nThe season's best (SB) of a skater/couple is the highest score achieved within a particular season. There is an SB for the combined total score and the individual segment scores (short program/rhythm dance, free skating/free dance). Only scores achieved at selected international competitions are considered; scores from national competitions and some international events are disregarded. The best combined total for each skater or couple appears on a list of season's bests, and the list may be used to help determine participants in the following season's Grand Prix series.\nSkaters and couples also have personal best (PB) scores, i.e. the highest scores achieved over their entire career, in terms of combined total and segment scores. However, PB scores are not completely comparable if achieved in different seasons because the ISU regulations and technical rules are modified before each new season. There may be different requirements specified to achieve a certain level; the required elements may change and new elements may be allowed (for example, two quads in the short program were permitted starting in the 2010\u201311 season); and the point values may change (for example, the values of quads were increased after the 2010 Olympics, and a second step sequence is no longer assigned a level in the men's competition). As a result of these variations in the technical requirements, the ISU places more weight on the season's bests, which are fully comparable within any one season.\nMusic and clothing.\nMusic.\nFor competitive programs, figure skaters were once restricted to instrumental music; vocals were allowed only if they contained no lyrics or words. Beginning in the 1997\u201398 season, the ISU decided to allow lyrics or words in ice dance music. Although the rules were not relaxed for singles and pairs, judges did not always penalize violations. At the 2011 World Championships, Florent Amodio's long program music included words but an insufficient number of judges voted for a deduction. In June 2012, the ISU voted to allow skaters from all disciplines to choose music with words in their competitive programs beginning in the 2014\u201315 season.\nSkaters may use professional music editors so that their music meets requirements. Ice dancers are required to skate to music that has a definite beat or rhythm. Singles and pair skaters more often skate to the melody and phrasing of their music. For long programs, figure skaters generally search for music with different moods and tempos. Music selections for exhibitions are less constrained than for competitive programs.\nClothing.\nSkaters are generally free to select their own attire, with a few restrictions. In competition, women may wear a dress, typically with matching attached briefs. This rule of costuming was created in response to Katarina Witt's costume and performance at the 1988 Winter Olympics. In 2004, the rule was extended to allow women to wear trousers. They may wear opaque flesh-colored leggings or tights under dresses and skirts, which may extend to cover their skates. Men must wear trousersthey are not allowed to wear tights, although officials do not always impose a deduction for violations. Matching costumes are not required in pair skating and ice dance.\nCompetition costumes vary widely, from simple designs to heavily beaded or trimmed costumes. Skaters risk a deduction if a piece of their costume falls onto the ice surface. An official may stop a program if he or she deems there to be a hazard. Skaters and family members may design their own costumes, sometimes with assistance from their coach or choreographer, or turn to professional designers. Costumes may cost thousands of dollars if designed by a top-level costume maker.\nAccording to current ISU regulations, costumes in competition must be fair, non-revealing, and appropriate for both short and long programs. Costumes should not be showy or exotic in nature. Clothing, however, can reflect the genre of music chosen. Although the use of flesh-colored fabric means the costumes are often less revealing than they may appear, there have been repeated attempts to ban clothing that gives the impression of \"excessive nudity\" or that is otherwise inappropriate for athletic competition. In general, accessories or props are not permitted in competition. The ISU allowed an exception for the original dance in the 2007\u201308 season but not since.\nEligibility.\nAge eligibility.\nTo compete internationally on the senior level, skaters must be at least 17 before July 1 of the preceding year. To be eligible for junior-level events, a skater must be at least 13 but under 19 before that date (or 21 for male pair skaters and ice dancers). A skater must meet the age requirement \"before\" it becomes July 1 in their place of birth. For example, Adelina Sotnikova was born a few hours into July 1, 1996, in Moscow and consequently, was not eligible to compete at Junior Worlds until 2011 and senior Worlds until 2013. The ISU's rules apply to international events. Many countries have no age requirements for domestic non-ISU competitions, thus, some skaters compete at the senior level nationally while not eligible for international competition.\nThe ISU has modified its age rules several times. Before the 1990s, 12 was the minimum age for senior international competitions. New rules were introduced in 1996, requiring skaters to be at least 15 before July 1 of the preceding year to compete at the Olympics, Worlds, Europeans, or Four Continents. The minimum age for all other senior internationals was 14 until July 2014, when it was raised to 15. The age limit was then raised to 16 years old for the 2023\u201324 season before increasing to 17 for the 2024\u201325 season, in a move to raise the age limit gradually. The move came after the 2022 Winter Olympics scandal over Kamila Valieva's doping allegations and the controversy over her responsibility as a minor.\nDuring the 2005\u201306 season, Mao Asada of Japan was age-eligible to compete at the Grand Prix Final, where she claimed the title, but she was not permitted to compete at the Olympics. For the 2008 World Championships, the United States was obliged to send skaters who had placed 5th and 7th at nationals because higher-placed skaters were too young, including a skater who missed the cutoff by 20 days. The ISU has strictly enforced the rules in recent years. However, American pair skater Natasha Kuchiki was allowed to compete at the 1990 World Championships when she was two years too young and American single skater Tara Lipinski, who was 13 at the time the 1996 rules were introduced, was grandfathered into remaining eligible for future events, along with other skaters who had already competed at the World Championships. A loophole also existed for a few years for underage skaters who had medaled at Junior Worlds.\nAs in gymnastics, skating has experienced controversy surrounding possible age falsification. On February 14, 2011, questions emerged surrounding nine Chinese skaters. The Associated Press found that birthdates listed on the Chinese Skating Association's website suggested five female skaters, Sui Wenjing, Zhang Dan, Yu Xiaoyu, Geng Bingwa, and Xu Binshu, were younger than their ISU ages, and six male skaters, Han Cong, Zhang Hao, Yan Han and Gao Yu, Zang Wenbo, and Xu Zuoren were older. The dates disappeared from the website by February 15. On February 17, the ISU said there were no discrepancies for Zhang Dan, Zhang Hao, and Xu Binshu between the birthdates listed on their passports, ISU registration forms and the Chinese Olympic Committee's website. Athletes in China sometimes face pressure to falsify their age.\nOther eligibility rules.\nSkaters may represent a country of which they are not yet a citizen in most competitions, except the Olympics which require citizenship.\nAt most international events, each country may send one to a maximum of three entries per discipline. Consequently, even if a skater has a high season's best, he or she may not be sent to major events if their country has many good skaters in their discipline. Some skaters have tried to circumvent this by representing another country. In response, the ISU introduced rules barring skaters from international events for a certain period of time. In the 2010 regulations, it was 24 months or more from the date of the last ISU Championship. In the 2012 regulations, the minimum was 18 months for singles and 12 months for pairs/ice dancers from the date of their last ISU Championships (Worlds, Europeans, Four Continents, Junior Worlds) and 12 months if they competed in some other international competition. Competitors may sit out for much longer because they also have to obtain a release from their previous federation. The ISU has set no limit to how long a country may hold skaters.\nSkaters may lose their ISU eligibility if they perform in an unsanctioned show or competition.\nBeginning in the 2010\u201311 season, minimum scores were introduced for the World, European, or Four Continents Championships. In the 2011\u201312 season, different minimum scores were introduced for the Grand Prix series.\nCompetitors' expenses, income, and funding.\nFigure skating is an expensive sport. This is particularly due to the costs of ice time and coaching. In the late 1980s, the expenses of a top-ten women's competitor at the U.S. Championships reached nearly US$50,000 a year. In October 2004, a U.S. Figure Skating article estimated the annual expense at US$9,000\u2013$10,000 for pre-juvenile, US$18,000 for juvenile, US$35,000\u2013$40,000 for novice, and said junior and senior levels were somewhat more expensive. In the 2010s, American senior national medalists had expenses in the mid-five-figure range. Swiss skater St\u00e9phane Lambiel said his costs were around CHF 100,000 per season. World champion Patrick Chan's expenses were Can$150,000. In 2015, CBC Sports estimated that a Canadian pair team had expenses of about Can$100,000 per year.\nPrize money is relatively low compared to other sports. A men's or women's singles skater who won the 2011 World Championships earned US$45,000, about 1.8% to 2.5% of the US$1,800,000\u2013$2,400,000 for winners of the tennis US Open and Australian Open. A couple who won the pairs or ice dance title split US$67,500. A winner of the senior Grand Prix Final in December 2011 earned US$25,000.\nSome national associations provide funding to some skaters if they meet certain criteria. Many skaters take part-time jobs and some have tried crowdfunding. In Germany, many elite skaters join the army to fund their skating. In Italy, some skaters join police agencies' sport groups, such as the Polizia Penitenziaria's \"Fiamme Azzurre\" (Carolina Kostner, Anna Cappellini, Luca Lanotte) or Polizia di Stato's \"Fiamme Oro\" (Federica Faiella, Paolo Bacchini). Some competitive skaters depend on income from shows. Shows must be sanctioned by their association, i.e. skaters may lose their competitive eligibility if they take part without permission. In some cases, skaters may feel pressure to compete through injury to be allowed to perform in a show.\nOthers may become involved with coaching younger athletes in order to fund their own training costs.\nInjuries and health issues.\nIn some countries, medical personnel may be slow to respond to accidents. At the 2000 World Championships in Nice, France, a pair skater who had been injured in a lift accident lay on the ice for several minutes and had to get up and leave the ice on his own before being offered medical attention.\nHead injuries, falls and collisions.\nCompetitive skaters generally do not wear helmets or other protective gear. There is a risk of head injuries, particularly in pair skating as a result of falls from lifts. Although pair skaters are most susceptible, serious head injuries can occur in all disciplines, including ice dance. Partners have accidentally slashed each other with their skate blades. This may occur when partners drift too close during side-by-side camel spins. Several female pair skaters have suffered head/face injuries during this element, including Elena Berezhnaya, Tatiana Totmianina, Jessica Dub\u00e9, Mandy W\u00f6tzel, Galina Maniachenko (Efremenko), and Elena Riabchuk.\nCommenting on falls and concussions, Madison Hubbell said that \"Most of the time, the worst falls are on things we kind of take for granted.\" Shin splints, knee injuries, and back problems are not uncommon. Hip damage may occur as a result of practising jumps and throws. In rare cases, intensive training of spins may result in subtle concussions (Lucinda Ruh).\nInjuries have also been sustained by skaters from different teams when many skaters are practising on the ice. Midori Ito collided with Laetitia Hubert at the 1991 World Championships, while Oksana Baiul and Tanja Szewczenko collided at the 1994 Olympics, but all went on to compete. At the 2014 Cup of China the Japanese Yuzuru Hanyu, winner of the Olympic title a few months before, and the Chinese Han Yan, collided during the warm up of the free program. Despite being visibly injured, both skaters finished the competition. On practice sessions with multiple skaters on the ice, the skater whose music is playing conventionally has right of way. Also, pairs and ice dancers skating as a unit have right of way over those skating separately as changing course is more difficult for a couple.\nEating disorders and RED\u2013S.\nEating disorders are reportedly common in figure skating and can result in the development of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S), formerly known as the \"female athlete triad\". RED-S is a syndrome of three interrelated conditions which can cause long-standing illness in girls and women and even death. Body image and the need to maintain a fit body is a very common issue in figure skating, as skaters age, their bodies change and change the way they must approach the sport. Skaters such as Gracie Gold, and Ashley Wagner have faced issues such as eating disorders and depression.\nDoping.\nFigure skaters occasionally have positive doping results but it is not common. In a 1991 interview, three-time Olympic champion Irina Rodnina admitted that Soviet skaters used doping substances in preparation for the competitive season, stating: \"Boys in pairs and singles used drugs, but this was only in August or September. This was done just in training, and everyone was tested (in the Soviet Union) before competitions.\"\nHistory.\nAlthough people have been ice skating for centuries, figure skating in its current form originated in the mid-19th century. \"A Treatise on Skating\" (1772) by the accomplished skater, Welshman Lt. 'Captain' Robert Jones (), is the first-known book on figure skating. He designed skates that could be attached to shoes by screws through the heels (rather than using straps), and these were soon available from Riccard's Manufactory in London.\nCompetitions were held in the \"English style\" of skating, which was stiff and formal and bore very little resemblance to modern figure skating. Without changing the basic techniques used by skaters, only a limited number of figure skating moves could be performed. This was still true in the mid-1800s before improvements were brought about by American skater Jackson Haines, who was considered to be the \"father of modern figure skating\". In the mid-1860s, Haines introduced a new style of skating, incorporating free and expressive techniques, which became known as the \"international style\". Although popular in Europe, the international style of skating was not widely adopted in the United States until long after Haines's death.\nEarly 1900s.\nThe International Skating Union was founded in 1892. The first European Figure Skating Championships were held in 1891 in Hamburg, Germany (won by Oskar Uhlig), and the first World Figure Skating Championships were held in 1896 in Saint Petersburg, Russia (won by Gilbert Fuchs). Only men competed in the early events but in 1902 a woman entered the World Championships for the first time: British female skater Madge Syers competed in the men's competition, finishing in second place behind Sweden's Ulrich Salchow. The ISU quickly banned women from competing against men, and established a separate \"ladies\" competition in 1906. Pair skating was introduced at the 1908 World Championships, where the title was won by Anna H\u00fcbler and Heinrich Burger of Germany.\nFigure skating was the first winter sport contested at the Olympics; it made its Olympic debut at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London. On March 20, 1914, an international figure skating championship was held in New Haven, Connecticut. This event was the forerunner of both the United States and Canadian National Championships. However, international competitions in figure skating were interrupted by World War I.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, figure skating was dominated by Sonja Henie of Norway. Henie turned competitive success into a lucrative professional career as a movie star and touring skater, also setting the fashion for female skaters to wear short skirts and white boots. The top male figure skaters of this period included Sweden's Gillis Grafstr\u00f6m and Austria's Karl Sch\u00e4fer.\nAfter World War II.\nSkating competitions were again interrupted for several years by World War\u00a0II. After the war, with many European rinks in ruins, skaters from the United States and Canada began to dominate international competitions and to introduce technical innovations to the sport. Dick Button, 1948 and 1952 Olympic Champion, was the first skater to perform the double Axel and triple loop jumps, as well as the flying camel spin.\nThe World Figure Skating Championships did not include ice dance until 1952. In its early years, ice dance was dominated by British skaters, and until 1960 the world title was won every year by a British couple, beginning with Jean Westwood and Lawrence Demmy.\nOn February 15, 1961, the entire U.S. figure skating team and their coaches were killed in the crash of Sabena Flight 548 in Brussels, Belgium en route to the World Championships in Prague. This tragedy sent the U.S. skating program into a period of rebuilding.\nMeanwhile, the Soviet Union rose to become a dominant force in the sport, especially in the disciplines of pair skating and ice dance. Soviet and Russian domination in pair skating began in the 1950s and continued throughout the rest of the 1900s. Only five non-Soviet or Russian teams won the Olympics and World Championships from 1965 to 2010. When Shen Xue and Zhao Hongbo of China won the gold medal at the 2010 games, this was the first time since 1960 that a Russian, Soviet, or Unified Team (CIS) flagged team did not win the gold medal. The 1967 World Championships was the last event held on an outdoor rink.\nEffect of television and the present day.\nCompulsory figures formerly accounted for up to 60% of the score in singles figure skating, meaning that skaters who could build up a significant lead in figures could win competitions even if they were mediocre free skaters. As television coverage of skating events became more important, the popularity of free skating increased because this part of the competition was televised and shown to the general public, whereas the compulsory figures competition was not. The television audience would complain when superior free programs sometimes failed to equate to gold medal victories. Beginning in 1968, the ISU progressively reduced the weighting of compulsory figures and introduced the short program in 1973. A critical issue was said to have been the continued failure of Janet Lynn to achieve on the world stage despite her outstanding free skate programs. For example, she missed out on a podium place at the 1971 World Championships after winning the free skate competition decisively, which produced an uproar and loud booing from the audience during the medal ceremony.\nWith these changes, the emphasis in competitive figure skating shifted to increased athleticism. Landing triple jumps during the short program and the free skate became more important. By the 1980s, some skaters began practising quadruple jumps. Jozef Sabovcik of Czechoslovakia landed a quad toe loop at the 1986 European Championships which was recognized at the event but then ruled invalid three weeks later due to a touchdown with his free foot. At the 1988 World Championships, Kurt Browning of Canada landed the first quad toe loop which has remained ratified. Despite expectations, it was several years before quads became an important part of men's skating. In 1988, Japan's Midori Ito became the first woman to land a triple Axel, pushing the athletic and technical level for women's programs. Worth only 20% by 1989, compulsory figures were eliminated from international competition in 1990.\nTelevision contributed to the sport's popularity by showing skaters in the kiss and cry area after competing. Television also played a role in removing the restrictive amateur status rules that once governed the sport. In May 1990, the ISU voted to allow skaters intending to skate professionally to return to ISU competition, provided that they obtained their national association's permission. In 1995, in an effort to retain skaters who might otherwise have given up their eligibility to participate in lucrative professional events, the ISU introduced prize money at its major competitions, funded by revenues from selling the TV rights to those events.\nIn 1984, more than 24 million people in Great Britain watched ice dance pair Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean earn unanimous 6.0s for presentation, the only perfect score in Olympic skating history, which was ranked the 8th greatest sporting moment in a UK poll. In the 1993 National Sports Study II, considered by the Associated Press as the largest study of spectator sport popularity in America, women's figure skating was the second most popular spectator sport in America, just behind NFL football out of over 100 sports surveyed. The 1993 study found that three figure skatersDorothy Hamill, Peggy Fleming, and Scott Hamiltonwere among the eight most popular athletes in the United States, of more than 800 athletes surveyed. Dorothy Hamill was statistically tied with Mary Lou Retton as the most popular athlete in America. The Tonya Harding scandal in 1994 increased interest in figure skating. The first night of the women's figure skating competition in the 1994 Winter Olympics achieved higher Nielsen TV ratings than the Super Bowl three weeks earlier and, to that date, was the most watched sports television program of all time.\nTo show support, spectators sometimes throw a variety of items onto the ice after the end of a figure skating program, most commonly stuffed toys and flowers. Officials discourage people from throwing flowers that are not fully wrapped because of the possibility of debris disrupting or endangering the following skaters.\nCountries that have produced a great many successful skaters include Russia and the former Soviet Union, the United States, Canada, Japan, China, France, Germany, and Italy. While the sport has grown in East Asia, training opportunities in South Asia are limited due to a scarcity of ice rinks. India had only four major indoor ice rinks as of 2011, but there were plans for ten more to be built, mostly in malls, over the following five years. As of 2016, three of these intended ten indoor rinks were built at Neptune Magnet Mall, Atria Millennium Mall, and Lulu Mall respectively.\nFour skating has mostly disappeared, while synchronized skating, singles/pair skating and ice dance have grown. On April 6, 2011, the International Olympic Committee officially confirmed the approval of a figure skating team event, which was introduced at the 2014 Winter Olympics. The elimination of the compulsory dance segment provided space for the team event. Each team is composed of a men's and women's singles skater, a pair, and an ice dance duo. A maximum of ten teams can compete, with five eliminated after the short program. In December 2011, the ISU released details of the qualifying system and the competition.\nAccording to writer Ellyn Kestnbaum, television helped figure skating become more celebrity oriented, with high-profile skaters being treated like entertainers and famous athletes in other sports. She states that television has encouraged \"casual fans and other members of the general public to understand skating in terms of media-shaped parables about broader cultural issues,\" including anxieties about femininity or masculinity, individuality versus conformity, and nationalistic sporting contests. Kestnbaum also states that even though most skating broadcasts are produced by networks' sports divisions, competitions, even the more serious ones, they are packaged with \"more emphasis on the aesthetic qualities of the skating\u2014or of the female skaters\u2014and on the pleasures of rooting for a home-country hero than on the technical details that determine the winners\". Viewers who depend upon the televised coverage of figure skating are limited in their access to information about it as a sport because broadcasters present a week's worth of competition in a few hours and they are compelled to avoid overloading viewers with too much information about the more technical aspects of the sport. Journalists and scholars who write about figure skating also tend to focus on the same broader cultural issues.\nIn popular culture.\nBooks\nFilms and series\nVideo Games"}
{"id": "11154", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11154", "title": "First Arab-Israeli War", "text": ""}
{"id": "11156", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11156", "title": "Farming", "text": ""}
{"id": "11157", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11157", "title": "Fudge (role-playing game system)", "text": "Fudge is a generic role-playing game system for use in freeform role-playing games. The name \"FUDGE\" was once an acronym for \"Freeform Universal Donated\" (later, \"Do-it-yourself\") \"Gaming Engine\" and, though the acronym has since been dropped, that phrase remains a good summation of the game's design goals. \"Fudge\" has been nominated for an Origins Award for \"Best Role-Playing Game System\" for the \"Deryni Adventure Game\".\nRather than being a rigidly pre-defined set of rules like \"d20 System\" or \"GURPS\", \"Fudge\" offers a customizable toolkit for building the users' own specialized role-playing game system. Such things as what attributes and skills will define characters are left to be determined by the Game Master and players, and several different optional systems for resolving actions and conflicts are offered. \"Fudge\" is not tied to any particular genre or setting and world builders are encouraged to invent appropriate attributes and rules tailored to the campaign.\nHistory.\nThe project that would lead to \"Fudge\" was first proposed by Steffan O'Sullivan in November 1992 on the rec.games.design newsgroup, and over the following months that online community would contribute to the directed project. One of the earliest stipulations of O'Sullivan was that the basic system would always remain free to the public over the internet, and the PDF of the 1995 version still is. The 1995 version of \"Fudge\" is available under a non-commercial licence.\nGrey Ghost Press, with the endorsement of Steffan O'Sullivan, publishes an expanded form of the \"Fudge\" system. There have been three Grey Ghost Press editions, the most current being the \"Fudge 10th Anniversary Edition\", which includes several suggested rules systems for common RPG elements and an example basic fantasy \"build\" of the game.\nIn March 2004, Grey Ghost Press acquired the copyright of \"Fudge\", and on April 6, 2005, they released a version of \"Fudge\" under the Open Game License.\nThe OGL license has allowed the \"Fate\" role-playing game system to build on \"Fudge\" as its underlying mechanic.\nIn 1999 \"Pyramid\" magazine named \"Fudge\" as one of \"The Millennium's Most Underrated Games\". Editor Scott Haring stated \"\"Fudge\" is an extremely flexible, rules-light system. It works great, and everybody who plays it, loves it. Why isn't it more popular? I dunno.\"\nName.\nAt the time \"Fudge\" was conceived, it was stylish to give role-playing games acronyms for names (for instance, \"GURPS\" and \"TWERPS\"), and originally the usenet design project referred to the game as \"SLUG\", for \"Simple Laid-back Universal Game\". However, this was soon changed to \"FUDGE\" for \"Free-form Universal Donated Gaming Engine\", but also because the word invoked connotations of an easy to make source of fun. This again was changed when Grey Ghost Press released their 1995 hard copy version of the game, to \"Free-form Universal Do-it-yourself Gaming Engine\".\nWith the publication of the Expanded Edition in 2000, the fad for acronym-based names had long since faded, and the writer and the publisher both felt that the forced acronym had become irrelevant. The game has been referred to officially as just \"Fudge\" ever since, though fans often still refer to it in the old manner as \"FUDGE\".\nGame mechanics.\nIn \"Fudge\", character Traits such as Attributes and Skills, are rated on a seven-level, ascending adjective scale: \"Terrible, Poor, Mediocre, Fair, Good, Great,\" and \"Superb.\"\n\"Fudge\" characters can also have Gifts and Faults, which are positive and negative traits that do not fit into the adjective scale.\nFudge dice.\n\"Fudge\" uses customized \"\"Fudge\" dice\" which have an equal number of plus, minus, and blank sides. A number of these dice are rolled, usually four at a time (\"4dF\" in Fudge dice notation), and for every plus side that comes up the result of using the Trait is considered one step higher (e.g. from \"Fair\" to \"Good\") and for every minus side that comes up the result is considered one step lower. The goal is to match or surpass the difficulty level, also on the adjective scale, of the test. Thus, a \"Good\" attribute is considered to be \"Great\" if the player were to roll two plus sides, one minus side, and one blank\u2014the minus side cancels out one of the plus sides and the remaining plus side raises the result by one step. The same \"Good\" attribute would be considered \"Poor\" if you were to roll three minus sides and one blank. The same dice roll can be achieved with six-sided dice, treating a 1 or 2 as [\u2212], a 3\u20134 as [\u00a0] and a 5\u20136 as [+].\nThere are also several alternative dice systems available that use ten-sided dice, coins, or playing cards.\nComplexity.\nThe rules of \"Fudge\" are highly customizable and can be adjusted for the level of simplicity or complexity desired by the Game Master and Players. Overall, the system is designed to encourage role-playing over strict adherence to a set of rules. In fact, the main \"Fudge\" documents encourage players to \"Just Fudge It\"; that is, to focus on the story being created rather than on the game rules. For example, one character creation method encourages players to first write prose descriptions of their characters and then translate those into \"Fudge\" Traits.\nReception.\nIn the January 1996 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 225), Rick Swan called this game system \"a remarkable achievement, a concise, logical analysis of RPG theory that amateur and pro designers alike would do well to ponder.\" Although Swan liked the simplicity and logic of the open system, he felt that too much of the onus fell on the gamemaster. \"Not only must he role-play the NPCs, stage memorable encounters, and keep the story on track, he must also come up with Difficulty Levels for every conceivable situation. It ain't easy.\" He concluded by giving the game a rating of 5 out of 6, saying, \"FUDGE is about as appropriate for novices as calculus is for preschoolers. Seasoned gamers, however, will be in for a pleasant surprise.\"\nIn Issue 17 of \"Shadis\", Leonard Wilson was enthusiastic about this game system, writing, \"Simply put, from start to finish, FUDGE is the sort of quality product that can't be mistaken for anything but a labor of love for everyone involved. If you're a role-player who frequents the Internet anyway, you'll be missing a real treasure if you don't download yourself a copy. Even if you don\u2019t frequent the Internet, if you've ever found yourself tinkering with the rules to a role-playing games, you'll find it well worth the effort to track down a copy of FUDGE.\"\nIn Issue 3 of the French games magazine \"Backstab\u2019\", St\u00e9phane Bura liked the game system, commenting \"This is, to my knowledge, the best system using a normal bell curve (frequent average results and rare extreme results) published to date ... Even if it requires some effort, FUDGE will satisfy those looking for a good generic system less complicated than \"GURPS\".\" Bura concluded by giving the game system a rating of 8 out of 10.\nIn Issue 30 of the Australian game magazine \"Australian Realms\", Mike Bell wrote, \"What lifts FUDGE to new heights of excellence [...] is the way it encourages and guides through designing your very own personalised RPG using the basic building blocks supplied by its author, Stefan O'Sullivan. Originally distributed via the Internet, buyers are actively encouraged to design and distribute their own FUDGE-based games so long as they include copyright notices and a disclaimer. Way cool!\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"Most people didn't see it at the time, but \"FUDGE\" marks a fundamental change in RPGs. Simultaneously a system of rules and a treatise on game design theory, it questions many of the methods and mechanics that are taken for granted about roleplaying and reshapes those assumptions, paving the way for other games to continue pushing into new forms in the coming decades.\""}
{"id": "11158", "revid": "21878292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11158", "title": "February 12", "text": ""}
{"id": "11161", "revid": "30021739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11161", "title": "Frederick Copleston", "text": "Frederick Charles Copleston (10 April 1907 \u2013 3 February 1994) was a British Jesuit priest, philosopher, and historian of philosophy, best known for his influential multi-volume \"A History of Philosophy\" (1946\u201375).\nCopleston achieved a degree of popularity in the media for debating the existence of God with Bertrand Russell in a celebrated 1948 BBC broadcast; the following year he debated logical positivism and the meaningfulness of religious language with his friend the analytic philosopher A. J. Ayer.\nOrigins.\nFrederick Charles Copleston was born on 10 April 1907 at Claremont in the parish of Trull, near Taunton in Somerset, England, the eldest son of Frederick Selwyn Copleston (1850\u20131935), a judge of the High Court in Rangoon, Burma, by his second wife, Norah Margaret Little. He was a member of the family of Copleston, lords of the manor of Copleston in Devon until 1659, one of the most ancient in that county according to a traditional rhyme related by John Prince (d.1723):\n\"Crocker, Cruwys, and Coplestone\",\n \"When the Conqueror came were at home\" \nBiography.\nHe was raised an Anglican\u2014his uncle, Reginald Stephen Copleston, was an Anglican bishop of Calcutta; another uncle, Ernest Copleston, was the Anglican Bishop of Colombo. Copleston was educated at Marlborough College from 1920 to 1925. At the age of eighteen, he converted to the Roman Catholic faith, which caused a great deal of stress in his family. Copleston explained his recognition of the objective authority in the Catholic Church:\"It seemed to me that if Christ was truly the Son of God and if he founded a Church to teach all nations in His name, it must be a Church teaching with authority, as her Master did. Obviously one might deny that Christ was the Son of God, and one might reject the claim that he founded a Church. But if these two claims were accepted, it seemed to me that in spite of all its faults the Roman Catholic Church was the only one which could reasonably be thought to have developed out of what Christ established.\" His father, though opposed to his son's becoming a Catholic, helped him complete his education at St John's College, Oxford, where he studied from 1925 to 1929. He graduated from Oxford University in 1929 having managed a third in classical moderations and a good second at Greats. After Oxford, Copleston entered St. Mary's College, Oscott as a seminarian for the diocese of Clifton, but realized the life was not for him.\nIn 1930, he entered instead the Jesuits. After completing the two-year Jesuit novitiate in Roehampton, he followed the traditional course of studies for the priesthood at the Jesuit house of studies in Heythrop, Oxfordshire and in 1937 he was ordained a Jesuit priest there. In 1938 he travelled to Germany to complete his training, returning to Britain just before the outbreak of war in 1939. Copleston was originally destined to study for his doctorate at the Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome, but the war now made that impossible. Instead, he accepted a posting that saw him return to Heythrop in Oxfordshire to teach the history of philosophy to the few Jesuits remaining there.\nFrom this time onwards, Copleston began writing his influential multi-volume \"A History of Philosophy\" (1946\u201375), a textbook that presents clear accounts of ancient, medieval, and modern philosophy. Still highly respected, Copleston's history has been described as \"a monumental achievement\" that \"stays true to the authors it discusses, being very much a work in exposition\".\nCopleston achieved a degree of popularity in the media for debating the existence of God with Bertrand Russell in a celebrated 1948 BBC broadcast. (See Copleston\u2013Russell debate). The following year he debated logical positivism and the meaningfulness of religious language with his friend the analytic philosopher A. J. Ayer.\nThroughout the rest of his academic career, Copleston accepted a number of prestigious titles, including visiting professor at Rome's Gregorian University, where he spent six months each year lecturing from 1952 to 1968. In 1970 the Jesuit Heythrop house of studies was relocated to London, where as Heythrop College it became a constituent part of the federal University of London. Copleston became the new college's respected principal and gave undergraduate courses. His uncontestable mastery of his material immediately won the confidence and respect of the students, who were drawn from among younger Jesuits and junior religious from male and female religious orders, and some lay men and women. Moreover, his affable manner, dry humour and unfailing courtesy made him popular. In that same year 1970, he was made Fellow of the British Academy (FBA), and in 1972 he was given a personal professorship by the University of London. In 1975, he was made an Honorary Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford.\nAfter officially retiring in 1974, he continued to lecture. From 1974 to 1982, Copleston was visiting professor at the University of Santa Clara, California, and from 1979 to 1981, he delivered the Gifford Lectures at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland, which were published as \"Religion and the One\". These lectures attempted to \"express themes perennial in his thinking and more personal than in his history\". Toward the end of his life, Copleston received honorary doctorates from a number of institutions, including Santa Clara University, California, Uppsala University, and the University of St Andrews.\nCopleston was offered memberships in the Royal Institute of Philosophy and in the Aristotelian Society. In 1993 he was made CBE. Father Frederick Copleston died on 3 February 1994 at St Thomas' Hospital in London, at the age of 86.\nLegacy.\nIn addition to his influential multi-volume \"History of Philosophy\" (1946\u201375), one of Copleston's most significant contributions to modern philosophy was his work on the theories of Saint Thomas Aquinas. He attempted to clarify Aquinas's Five Ways (in the \"Summa Theologica\") by making a distinction between \"in fieri\" causes and \"in esse\" causes. By doing so, Copleston makes clear that Aquinas wanted to put forth the concept of an omnipresent God rather than a being that could have disappeared after setting the chain of cause and effect into motion.\nWorks.\nOther select works\nRelated works\nHughes, Gerard J. (1987) \"\""}
{"id": "11162", "revid": "48296011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11162", "title": "Finance", "text": "Finance refers to monetary resources and to the study and discipline of money, currency, assets and liabilities. As a subject of study, it is related to but distinct from economics, which is the study of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services. Based on the scope of financial activities in financial systems, the discipline can be divided into personal, corporate, and public finance.\nIn these financial systems, assets are bought, sold, or traded as financial instruments, such as currencies, loans, bonds, shares, stocks, options, futures, etc. Assets can also be banked, invested, and insured to maximize value and minimize loss. In practice, risks are always present in any financial action and entities.\nDue to its wide scope, a broad range of subfields exists within finance. Asset-, money-, risk- and investment management aim to maximize value and minimize volatility. Financial analysis assesses the viability, stability, and profitability of an action or entity. Some fields are multidisciplinary, such as mathematical finance, financial law, financial economics, financial engineering and financial technology. These fields are the foundation of business and accounting. In some cases, theories in finance can be tested using the scientific method, covered by experimental finance.\nThe early history of finance parallels the early history of money, which is prehistoric. Ancient and medieval civilizations incorporated basic functions of finance, such as banking, trading and accounting, into their economies. In the late 19th century, the global financial system was formed.\nIn the middle of the 20th century, finance emerged as a distinct academic discipline, separate from economics. The earliest doctoral programs in finance were established in the 1960s and 1970s. Today, finance is also widely studied through career-focused undergraduate and master's level programs.\nThe financial system.\nAs outlined, the financial system consists of the flows of capital that take place between individuals and households (personal finance), governments (public finance), and businesses (corporate finance). \"Finance\" thus studies the process of channeling money from savers and investors to entities that need it. Savers and investors have money available which could earn interest or dividends if put to productive use. Individuals, companies and governments must obtain money from some external source, such as loans or credit, when they lack sufficient funds to run their operations.\nIn general, an entity whose income exceeds its expenditure can lend or invest the excess, intending to earn a fair return. Correspondingly, an entity where income is less than expenditure can raise capital usually in one of two ways: (i) by borrowing in the form of a loan (private individuals), or by selling government or corporate bonds; (ii) by a corporation selling equity, also called stock or shares (which may take various forms: preferred stock or common stock). The owners of both bonds and stock may be \"institutional investors\"\u2014financial institutions such as investment banks and pension funds\u2014or private individuals, called \"private investors\" or \"retail investors.\" (See Financial market participants.)\nThe lending is often indirect, through a financial intermediary such as a bank, or via the purchase of notes or bonds (corporate bonds, government bonds, or mutual bonds) in the bond market. The lender receives interest, the borrower pays a higher interest than the lender receives, and the financial intermediary earns the difference for arranging the loan.\nA bank aggregates the activities of many borrowers and lenders. Banks accept deposits from individuals and businesses, paying interest on these funds. The bank then lends these deposits to borrowers. Banks facilitate transactions between borrowers and lenders of various sizes, enabling efficient financial coordination.\nInvesting typically entails the purchase of stock, either individual securities or via a mutual fund, for example. Stocks are usually sold by corporations to investors so as to raise required capital in the form of \"equity financing\", as distinct from the \"debt financing\" described above. The financial intermediaries here are the investment banks. The investment banks find the initial investors and facilitate the listing of the securities, typically shares and bonds. Additionally, they facilitate the securities exchanges, which allow their trade thereafter, as well as the various service providers which manage the performance or risk of these investments. These latter include mutual funds, pension funds, wealth managers, and stock brokers, typically servicing retail investors (private individuals).\nInter-institutional trade and investment, and fund-management at this scale, is referred to as \"wholesale finance\". \nInstitutions here extend the products offered, with related trading, to include bespoke options, swaps, and structured products, as well as specialized financing; this \"financial engineering\" is inherently mathematical, and these institutions are then the major employers of \"quants\" (see below). In these institutions, risk management, regulatory capital, and compliance play major roles.\nAreas of finance.\nAs outlined, finance comprises, broadly, the three areas of personal finance, corporate finance, and public finance. These, in turn, overlap and employ various activities and sub-disciplines\u2014chiefly investments, risk management, and quantitative finance.\nPersonal finance.\nPersonal finance refers to the practice of budgeting to ensure enough funds are available to meet basic needs, while ensuring there is only a reasonable level of risk to lose said capital. Personal finance may involve paying for education, financing durable goods such as real estate and cars, buying insurance, investing, and saving for retirement. Personal finance may also involve paying for a loan or other debt obligations. The main areas of personal finance are considered to be income, spending, saving, investing, and protection. The following steps, as outlined by the Financial Planning Standards Board, suggest that an individual will understand a potentially secure personal finance plan after:\nCorporate finance.\nCorporate finance deals with the actions that managers take to increase the value of the firm to the shareholders, the sources of funding and the capital structure of corporations, and the tools and analysis used to allocate financial resources. While corporate finance is in principle different from managerial finance, which studies the financial management of all firms rather than corporations alone, the concepts are applicable to the financial problems of all firms, and this area is then often referred to as \"business finance\".\nTypically, \"corporate finance\" relates to the \"long term\" objective of maximizing the value of the entity's assets, its stock, and its return to shareholders, while also balancing risk and profitability. This entails three primary areas: \nThe latter creates the link with investment banking and securities trading, as above, in that the capital raised will generically comprise debt, i.e. corporate bonds, and equity, often listed shares. Re risk management within corporates, see below.\nFinancial managers\u2014i.e. as distinct from corporate financiers\u2014focus more on the \"short term\" elements of profitability, cash flow, and \"working capital management\" (inventory, credit and debtors), ensuring that the firm can safely and profitably carry out its financial \"and operational\" objectives; i.e. that it: (1) can service both maturing short-term debt repayments, and scheduled long-term debt payments, and (2) has sufficient cash flow for ongoing and upcoming operational expenses. (See Financial management and FP&amp;A.)\nPublic finance.\nPublic finance describes finance as related to sovereign states, sub-national entities, and related public entities or agencies. It generally encompasses a long-term strategic perspective regarding investment decisions that affect public entities. These long-term strategic periods typically encompass five or more years. Public finance is primarily concerned with:\nCentral banks, such as the Federal Reserve System banks in the United States and the Bank of England in the United Kingdom, are strong players in public finance. They act as lenders of last resort as well as strong influences on monetary and credit conditions in the economy.\nDevelopment finance, which is related, concerns investment in economic development projects provided by a (quasi) governmental institution on a non-commercial basis; these projects would otherwise not be able to get financing. A public\u2013private partnership is primarily used for infrastructure projects: a private sector corporate provides the financing up-front, and then draws profits from taxpayers or users.\nClimate finance, and the related Environmental finance, address the financial strategies, resources and instruments used in climate change mitigation.\nInvestment management.\nInvestment management is the professional asset management of various securities\u2014typically shares and bonds, but also other assets, such as real estate, commodities and alternative investments\u2014in order to meet specified investment goals for the benefit of investors.\nAs above, investors may be institutions, such as insurance companies, pension funds, corporations, charities, educational establishments, or private investors, either directly via investment contracts or, more commonly, via collective investment schemes like mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, or real estate investment trusts.\nAt the heart of investment management is asset allocation\u2014diversifying the exposure among these asset classes, and among individual securities within each asset class\u2014as appropriate to the client's investment policy, in turn, a function of risk profile, investment goals, and investment horizon (see Investor profile). Here:\nOverlaid is the portfolio manager's investment style\u2014broadly, active vs passive, value vs growth, and small cap vs. large cap\u2014and investment strategy.\nIn a well-diversified portfolio, achieved investment performance will, in general, largely be a function of the asset mix selected, while the individual securities are less impactful. The specific approach or philosophy will also be significant, depending on the extent to which it is complementary with the market cycle.\nAdditional to this diversification, the fundamental risk mitigant employed, investment managers will apply various hedging techniques as appropriate, these may relate to the portfolio as a whole or to individual stocks. Bond portfolios are often (instead) managed via cash flow matching or immunization, while for derivative portfolios and positions, traders use \"the Greeks\" to measure and then offset sensitivities. In parallel, managers \u2013 active and passive \u2013 will monitor tracking error, thereby minimizing and preempting any underperformance vs their \"benchmark\".\nA quantitative fund is managed using computer-based mathematical techniques (increasingly, machine learning) instead of human judgment. The actual trading is typically automated via sophisticated algorithms.\nRisk management.\nRisk management, in general, is the study of how to control risks and balance the possibility of gains; it is the process of measuring risk and then developing and implementing strategies to manage that risk. \nFinancial risk management is the practice of protecting corporate value against financial risks, often by \"hedging\" exposure to these using financial instruments. The focus is particularly on credit and market risk, and in banks, through regulatory capital, includes operational risk.\nFinancial risk management is related to corporate finance in two ways. Firstly, firm exposure to market risk is a direct result of previous capital investments and funding decisions; while credit risk arises from the business's credit policy and is often addressed through credit insurance and provisioning. Secondly, both disciplines share the goal of enhancing or at least preserving, the firm's economic value, and in this context overlaps also enterprise risk management, typically the domain of strategic management. Here, businesses devote much time and effort to forecasting, analytics and performance monitoring. (See ALM and treasury management.)\nFor banks and other wholesale institutions, risk management focuses on managing, and as necessary hedging, the various positions held by the institution\u2014both trading positions and long term exposures\u2014and on calculating and monitoring the resultant economic capital, and regulatory capital under Basel III. The calculations here are mathematically sophisticated, and within the domain of quantitative finance as below. Credit risk is inherent in the business of banking, but additionally, these institutions are exposed to counterparty credit risk. Banks typically employ Middle office \"Risk Groups\", whereas front office risk teams provide risk \"services\" (or \"solutions\") to customers.\nInsurers manage their own risks with a focus on solvency and the ability to pay claims: Life Insurers are concerned more with longevity risk and interest rate risk; Short-Term Insurers (Property, Health,Casualty) emphasize catastrophe- and claims volatility risks. For expected claims reserves are set aside periodically, while to absorb unexpected losses, a minimum level of capital is maintained. \nQuantitative finance.\nQuantitative finance\u2014also referred to as \"mathematical finance\"\u2014includes those finance activities where a sophisticated mathematical model is required, and thus overlaps several of the above.\nAs a specialized practice area, quantitative finance comprises primarily three sub-disciplines; the underlying theory and techniques are discussed in the next section:\nFinancial theory.\nFinancial theory is studied and developed within the disciplines of management, (financial) economics, accountancy and applied mathematics.\nIn the abstract, \"finance\" is concerned with the investment and deployment of assets and liabilities over \"space and time\"; i.e., it is about performing valuation and asset allocation today, based on the risk and uncertainty of future outcomes while appropriately incorporating the time value of money. \nDetermining the present value of these future values, \"discounting\", must be at the risk-appropriate discount rate, in turn, a major focus of finance-theory.As financial theory has roots in many disciplines, including mathematics, statistics, economics, physics, and psychology, it can be considered a mix of an art and science, and there are ongoing related efforts to organize a list of unsolved problems in finance.\nManagerial finance.\nManagerial finance \nis the branch of finance that deals with the financial aspects of the management of a company, and the financial dimension of managerial decision-making more broadly. It provides the theoretical underpin for the practice described above, concerning itself with the managerial application of the various finance techniques. Academics working in this area are typically based in business school finance departments, in accounting, or in management science.\nThe tools addressed and developed relate in the main to managerial accounting and corporate finance: \nthe former allow management to better understand, and hence act on, financial information relating to profitability and performance; the latter, as above, are about optimizing the overall financial structure, including its impact on working capital. Key aspects of managerial finance thus include:\nThe discussion, however, extends to business strategy more broadly, emphasizing alignment with the company's overall strategic objectives; and similarly incorporates the managerial perspectives of planning, directing, and controlling.\nFinancial economics.\nFinancial economics is the branch of economics that studies the interrelation of financial variables, such as prices, interest rates and shares, as opposed to real economic variables, i.e. goods and services. It thus centers on pricing, decision making, and risk management in the financial markets, and produces many of the commonly employed financial models. (Financial econometrics is the branch of financial economics that uses econometric techniques to parameterize the relationships suggested.)\nThe discipline has two main areas of focus: asset pricing and corporate finance; the first being the perspective of providers of capital, i.e. investors, and the second of users of capital; respectively:\nFinancial mathematics.\nFinancial mathematics is the field of applied mathematics concerned with financial markets; \nLouis Bachelier's doctoral thesis, defended in 1900, is considered to be the first scholarly work in this area. The field is largely focused on the modeling of derivatives\u2014with much emphasis on interest rate- and credit risk modeling\u2014while other important areas include insurance mathematics and quantitative portfolio management. Relatedly, the techniques developed are applied to pricing and hedging a wide range of asset-backed, government, and corporate-securities.\nAs above, in terms of practice, the field is referred to as quantitative finance and / or mathematical finance, and comprises primarily the three areas discussed.\nThe main mathematical tools and techniques are, correspondingly:\nMathematically, these separate into : derivatives pricing uses risk-neutral probability (or arbitrage-pricing probability), denoted by \"Q\"; while risk and portfolio management generally use physical (or actual or actuarial) probability, denoted by \"P\". These are interrelated through the above \"Fundamental theorem of asset pricing\".\nThe subject has a close relationship with financial economics, which, as outlined, is concerned with much of the underlying theory that is involved in financial mathematics: generally, financial mathematics will derive and extend the mathematical models suggested. Computational finance is the branch of (applied) computer science that deals with problems of practical interest in finance, and especially emphasizes the numerical methods applied here.\nExperimental finance.\nExperimental finance aims to establish different market settings and environments to experimentally observe and provide a lens through which science can analyze agents' behavior and the resulting characteristics of trading flows, information diffusion, and aggregation, price setting mechanisms, and returns processes. Researchers in experimental finance can study to what extent existing financial economics theory makes valid predictions and therefore prove them, as well as attempt to discover new principles on which such theory can be extended and be applied to future financial decisions. Research may proceed by conducting trading simulations or by establishing and studying the behavior of people in artificial, competitive, market-like settings.\nBehavioral finance.\nBehavioral finance studies how the \"psychology\" of investors or managers affects financial decisions and markets \nand is relevant when making a decision that can impact either negatively or positively on one of their areas. With more in-depth research into behavioral finance, it is possible to bridge what actually happens in financial markets with analysis based on financial theory. Behavioral finance has grown over the last few decades to become an integral aspect of finance.\nBehavioral finance includes such topics as:\nA strand of behavioral finance has been dubbed quantitative behavioral finance, which uses mathematical and statistical methodology to understand behavioral biases in conjunction with valuation. \nQuantum finance.\nQuantum finance involves applying quantum mechanical approaches to financial theory, providing novel methods and perspectives in the field. \"Quantum\" \"finance\" is an interdisciplinary field, in which theories and methods developed by \"quantum\" physicists and economists are applied to solve financial problems. It represents a branch known as econophysics. Although \"quantum\" computational methods have been around for quite some time and use the basic principles of physics to better understand the ways to implement and manage cash flows, it is mathematics that is actually important in this new scenario Finance theory is heavily based on financial instrument pricing such as stock option pricing. Many of the problems facing the finance community have no known analytical solution. As a result, numerical methods and computer simulations for solving these problems have proliferated. This research area is known as computational finance. Many computational finance problems have a high degree of computational complexity and are slow to converge to a solution on classical computers. In particular, when it comes to option pricing, there is additional complexity resulting from the need to respond to quickly changing markets. For example, in order to take advantage of inaccurately priced stock options, the computation must complete before the next change in the almost continuously changing stock market. As a result, the finance community is always looking for ways to overcome the resulting performance issues that arise when pricing options. This has led to research that applies alternative computing techniques to finance. Most commonly used quantum financial models are quantum continuous model, quantum binomial model, multi-step quantum binomial model etc.\nHistory of finance.\nThe origin of finance can be traced to the beginning of state formation and trade during the Bronze Age. The earliest historical evidence of finance is dated to around 3000 BCE. Banking originated in West Asia, where temples and palaces were used as safe places for the storage of valuables. Initially, the only valuable that could be deposited was grain, but cattle and precious materials were eventually included. During the same period, the Sumerian city of Uruk in Mesopotamia supported trade by lending as well as the use of interest. In Sumerian, \"interest\" was \"mas\", which translates to \"calf\". In Greece and Egypt, the words used for interest, \"tokos\" and \"ms\" respectively, meant \"to give birth\". In these cultures, interest indicated a valuable increase, and seemed to consider it from the lender's point of view. The Code of Hammurabi (1792\u20131750 BCE) included laws governing banking operations. The Babylonians were accustomed to charging interest at the rate of 20 percent per year. By 1200 BCE, cowrie shells were used as a form of money in China.\nThe use of coins as a means of representing money began in the years between 700 and 500 BCE. Herodotus mentions the use of crude coins in Lydia around 687 BCE and, by 640 BCE, the Lydians had started to use coin money more widely and opened permanent retail shops. Shortly after, cities in Classical Greece, such as Aegina, Athens, and Corinth, started minting their own coins between 595 and 570 BCE. During the Roman Republic, interest was outlawed by the \"Lex Genucia\" reforms in 342 BCE, though the provision went largely unenforced. Under Julius Caesar, a ceiling on interest rates of 12% was set, and much later under Justinian it was lowered even further to between 4% and 8%.\nThe first stock exchange was opened in Antwerp in 1531. Since then, popular exchanges such as the London Stock Exchange (founded in 1773) and the New York Stock Exchange (founded in 1793) were created."}
{"id": "11163", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11163", "title": "Fund management", "text": ""}
{"id": "11164", "revid": "31519789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11164", "title": "February 17", "text": ""}
{"id": "11166", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11166", "title": "Feminist", "text": ""}
{"id": "11167", "revid": "1265347651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11167", "title": "The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix", "text": "The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix () is a 1975 Norwegian stop-motion-animated sports film directed by Ivo Caprino. It is based on characters from a series of books by Norwegian cartoonist and author Kjell Aukrust.\nIt is the most widely seen Norwegian film of all time, having sold some 5.5 million tickets since its release to a population which currently numbers just over 5 million. The film sold 28 million movie tickets in the former Soviet Union.\nPlot.\nIn the village of Fl\u00e5klypa, (En. Pinchcliffe), the inventor Reodor Felgen (En. Theodore Rimspoke) lives with his animal friends Ludvig (En. Lambert) (a nervous, pessimistic and melancholic hedgehog) and Solan Gundersen (En. Sonny Duckworth) (a cheerful and optimistic magpie). Reodor works as a bicycle repairman, though he spends most of his time inventing weird Rube Goldberg-like contraptions. One day, the trio discovers that one of Reodor's former assistants, Rudolf Blodstrupmoen (En. Rudolph Gore-Slimey), has stolen his design for a race car engine and has become a world champion Formula One driver. Solan secures funding from Arab oil sheik Ben Redic Fy Fazan (En. Abdul Ben Bonanza), who happens to be vacationing in Fl\u00e5klypa, and to enter the race, the trio builds a gigantic racing car: \"Il Tempo Gigante\"\u2014a fabulous construction with two extremely big engines (weighing 2.8 tonnes alone and making the seismometer in Bergen show 7.8 Richter when started the first time), a body made out of copper, a spinning radar (that turns out to be useful when Blodstrupmoen starts engaging in smoke warfare during the race), super-retometric distributor, and its own blood bank. Reodor ends up winning despite Blodstrupmoen's attempts at sabotage.\nHistory.\nIn 1970, Ivo Caprino and his small team of collaborators started work on a 25-minute-long TV special, which would eventually become \"The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix\". The TV special was a collection of sketches based on Aukrust's books, with no real storyline. After 1\u00bd years of work, it was decided that it didn't really work as a whole, so production on the TV special was stopped (with the exception of some very short clips, no material from it has ever been seen by the public). About one year after the rejection, Ivo Caprino's son, Remo Caprino, got the idea to make the sketches into a full-length film. Kjell Aukrust, Ivo Caprino, Kjell Syversen, and Remo Caprino began at that point to write the script for what would later become \"The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix\".\nThe film is heavily inspired by the birthplace of Kjell Aukrust's father, Lom. The Fl\u00e5klypa-mountain is a stylized version of a real mountain, where the valley underneath it is named Fl\u00e5klypa. It is also widely believed that the characters are caricatures of real persons.\nThe film was made in 3\u00bd years by a team of approximately five people. Caprino directed and animated. Bjarne Sandemose (Caprino's principal collaborator throughout his career) built most of the props, sets, and cars and was in charge of the technical aspects of making the film. Ingeborg Riiser designed the puppets and Gerd Alfsen made the costumes and props. Charley Patey was the cameraman.\nWhen it came out in 1975, \"The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix\" was an enormous success in Norway, selling 1 million tickets in its first year of release. It remains the biggest box office hit of all time in Norway (Caprino Studios claim it has sold 5.5 million tickets to date) and was also released in many other countries. The film held the record for the highest grossing stop motion animated film until it was surpassed in 1993 by \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\". The film was shown in cinemas every day of the week for 28 years, from 1975 until 2003\u2014mainly in Norway, Moscow and Tokyo. A real \"Il tempo gigante\" car was used to promote the film, e.g. driving around the Hockenheimring between races. The car originally had a 250 hp Cadillac engine but when Niki Lauda saw it he provided them with a 7.6 L, 550 hp, big-block Chevrolet. The car also has an auxiliary jet-engine, but due to EU restrictions the vehicle is barely permitted to be used at all save for exclusive TV cameos.\nThe UK release featured the voice of well-known Formula One commentator Murray Walker. There is also a US dubbed version.\nThe film was first released on DVD in 2001. In 2005, a digitally restored 30th-anniversary DVD was released which featured soundtracks and subtitles in five languages including Danish, English, Finnish, Swedish and Norwegian. \nThe film aired every Christmas Eve in Norway for several years, until a change of channel from NRK to TV 2 changed the airing date to 23 or 25 December. In 2009 it showed on the 25th.\nIt was released on 8 May 1980 in Australian theaters by Filmways Australia and released in US and Canada in 1981.\nOther works inspired.\nIn 2000, a computer game based on the film was released. The game was created by Tyr Neilsen who was Creative Director and in charge of production at Ingames Interactive until a debilitating accident ended his video game career. The project was taken over and completed by Caprino's son Remo, while his grandson Mario was lead programmer. The lead designer was Joe Dever. The game was ported to Nintendo DS in 2010 and sold over 380,000 copies in Norway.\nThe film inspired a young Christian von Koenigsegg to create the Koenigsegg CC, the first of the Koenigsegg line of supercars.\nNorwegian hip-hop duo Multicyde based their 1999 single \"Not for the Dough\" on a sample from the film's soundtrack and featured excerpts from the film in the song's music video."}
